II

THE JESUS OF THE GOSPELS


However widely views may differ even now in the sphere of Gospel
criticism, all really competent investigators agree on one point
with rare unanimity: the Gospels are not historical documents in the
ordinary sense of the word, but creeds, religious books, literary
documents revealing the mind of the Christian community. Their purpose
is consequently not to give information as to the life and teachings
of Jesus which would correspond to reality, but to awaken belief in
Jesus as the Messiah sent from God for the redemption of his people,
to strengthen and defend that belief against attacks. And as creeds
they confine themselves naturally to recounting such words and events
as have any significance for the faith; and they have the greatest
interest in so arranging and representing the facts as to make them
accord with the content of that faith.




(a) The Synoptic Jesus.

Of the numerous Gospels which were still current in the first half
of the second century, as is well known, only four have come down to
us. The others were not embodied by the Church in the Canon of the New
Testament writings, and consequently fell into oblivion. Of these at
most a few names and isolated and insignificant fragments remain to
us. Thus we know of a Gospel of Matthew, of Thomas, of Bartholomew,
Peter, the twelve apostles, &c. Of our four Gospels, two bear the
names of apostles and two the names of companions and pupils of
apostles, viz., Mark and Luke. In this, of course, it is in no way
meant that they were really written by these persons. According to
Chrysostom these names were first assigned to them towards the end
of the second century. And the titles do not run: Gospel of Matthew,
of Mark, and so on, but "according to" Matthew, "according to" Mark,
Luke, and John; so that they indicate at most only the persons or
schools whose particular conception of the Gospel they represent.

Of these Gospels, again, that of John ranks as the latest. It
presupposes the others, and shows such a dogmatic tendency, that it
cannot be considered the source of the story. Of the remaining Gospels,
which on account of their similarity as to form and matter have been
termed "Synoptic" (i.e., such as must be dealt with in connection
with each other and thus only give a real idea of the Saviour's
personality), that of Mark is generally regarded as the oldest. Matthew
and Luke rely on Mark, and all three, according to the prevailing
view, are indebted to a common Aramaic source, wherein Jesus' didactic
sermons are supposed to have been contained. Tradition points to John
Mark, the nephew of Barnabas, pupil of Peter, and Paul's companion on
his first missionary journey and later a sharer in the captivity at
Rome, as the author of the Gospel of Mark. It is believed that this
was written shortly after the destruction of Jerusalem (70)--i.e., at
least forty years after Jesus' death (!). This tradition depends upon
a note of the Church historian Eusebius (d. about 340 A.D.), according
to which Papias, Bishop of Hierapolis in Asia Minor, learnt from the
"elder John" that Mark had set forth what he had heard from Peter,
and what this latter had in turn heard from the "Lord." On account
of its indirect nature and of Eusebius' notorious unreliability this
note is not a very trustworthy one, [375] and belief in it should
disappear in view of the fact that the author of the Gospel of Mark
had no idea of the spot where Jesus is supposed to have lived. And
yet Mark is supposed to have been born in Jerusalem and to have been a
missionary! As Wernle shows in his work, "Die Quellen des Lebens Jesu,"
Mark stands quite far from the life of Jesus both in time and place(!);
indeed, he has no clear idea of Jesus' doings and course of life. [376]
And Wrede confirms this in his work, "Das Messias-geheimnis" (1901),
probably the clearest and deepest inquiry into the fundamental
problem of the Gospel of Mark which we possess. Jesus is for Mark
at once the Messiah and the Son of God. "Faith in this dogma must be
aroused, it must be established and defended. The whole Gospel is a
defence. Mark wishes to lead all his readers, among whom he counts
the Heathens and Gentile Christians, to the recognition of what the
heathen centurion said, 'Truly this man was the Son of God!' [377]
The whole account is directed to this end." [378]

Mark's main proof for this purpose is that of miracles. Jesus'
doctrines are with Mark of so much less importance than his miracles,
that we never learn exactly what Jesus preached. "Consequently the
historical portrait is very obscure: Jesus' person is distorted
into the grotesque and the fantastic"(!) [379] Not only does Mark
often introduce his own thought into the tradition about Jesus,
and so prove perfectly wrong, and indeed absurd, the view held,
for instance, by Wernle, that Jesus had intentionally made use of an
obscure manner of speech and had spoken in parables and riddles so
as not to be understood by the people; [380] but also the connection
which he has established between the accounts, which had first gone
from mouth to mouth for a long time in isolation, is a perfectly
disconnected and external one. At first the stories reported by Mark
were totally disconnected with one another. There is no evidence at
all of their having followed each other in the present order(!). [381]
So that only the matter, not what Mark made of it, is of historical
value. [382] Single stories, discourses, and phrases are bound into
a whole by Mark; and often enough it may be seen that we have here a
tradition which was first built up in the earliest Christianity long
after Jesus' death. Experiences were at first gradually fashioned into
a story--and the miracle-stories may especially be regarded in this
way. In spite of all these trimmings and alterations, and in spite of
the fact that neither in the words of Jesus nor in the stories is it
for the most part any longer possible to separate the actual from the
traditional, which for forty years was not put into writing--in spite
of all this, the historical value of the traditions given us by Mark
is "very highly" estimated. For not only is "the general impression
of power, originality, and creation" "valuable," which is given in
this account of Mark's, but also there are so many individual phrases
"corresponding to reality." Numerous accounts, momentary pictures and
remarks, "speak for themselves." The modesty and ingenuousness(!), the
freshness and joy(!) with which Mark recounts all this, show distinctly
that he is here the reporter of a valid tradition, and that he writes
nothing but what eye-witnesses have told him(!). "And so finally, in
spite of all, this Gospel remains an extraordinarily valuable work,
a collection of old and genuine material, which is loosely arranged
and placed under a few leading conceptions; produced perhaps by that
Mark whom the New Testament knows, and of whom Papias heard from the
mouth of the elder John." [383]

One does not trust one's eyes with this style of attempting to set
up Mark as an even half-credible "historical source." This attempt
will remind us only too forcibly of Wrede's ironical remarks when
he is making fun of the "decisions as you like it" that flourish
in the study of Jesus' life. "This study," says Wrede, "suffers
from psychological suggestion, and this is one style of historical
solution." [384] One believes that he can secure this, another that,
as the historical nucleus of the Gospel; but neither has objective
proofs for his assertions. [385] If we wish to work with an historical
nucleus, we must really make certain of a nucleus. The whole point
is, that in an anecdote or phrase something is proved, which makes
any other explanation of the matter under consideration improbable,
or at least doubtful. [386] It seems very questionable, after his
radical criticism of the historical credibility of Mark's Gospel, that
Wrede saw in it such a "historical kernel"--though this is supposed
by Wernle to "speak for itself." Moreover, Wrede's opinion of the
"historian" Mark is not essentially different from Wernle's. In
his opinion, for example, Jesus' disciples, as the Gospel portrays
them, with their want of intelligence bordering on idiocy, their
folly, and their ambiguous conduct as regards their Master, are
"not real figures." [387] He also concedes, as we have stated, that
Mark had no real idea of the historical life of Jesus, [388] even if
"pallid fragments"(!) of such an idea entered into his superhistorical
faith-conception. "The Gospel of Mark," he says, "has in this sense a
place among the histories of dogma." [389] The belief that in it the
development of Jesus' public life is still perceptible appears to be
decaying. [390] "It would indeed be in the highest degree desirable
that such a Gospel were not the oldest." [391]

Thus, then, does Mark stand as an historical source. After this we
could hardly hope to be much strengthened in our belief in Jesus'
historical reality by the other two Synoptics. Of these, Luke's Gospel
must have been written, in the early part of the second century, by an
unknown Gentile Christian; and Matthew's is not the work of a single
author, but was produced--and unmistakably in the interests of the
Church--by various hands in the first half of the second century. [392]
But now both, as we have said, are based on Mark. And even if in
their representations they have attained a certain "peculiar value"
which is wanting in Mark--e.g., a greater number of Jesus' parables
and words--even if they have embellished the story of his life by
the addition of legendary passages (e.g., of the history of the time
preceding the Saviour, of many additions to the account of the Passion
and Resurrection, &c.), this cannot quite establish the existence of
an historical Jesus. It is true that Wernle takes the view that in this
respect "old traditions" have been preserved "with wonderful fidelity"
by both the Evangelists; but, on the other hand, he concedes as to
certain of Luke's accounts that even if he had used old traditions
they need not have been as yet written, and certainly they need not
have been "historically reliable." It seems rather peculiar when,
leaving completely on one side the historical value of the tradition,
he emphatically declares that even such a strong interest, as in
his opinion the Evangelists had in the shaping and formation of their
account, could not in any way set aside "the worth of its rich treasure
of parables and stories, through which Jesus himself [!] speaks to
us with freshness and originality" (!). He also strangely sums up at
the end, "that the peculiar value of both Gospels, in spite of their
very mixed nature, has claim enough on our gratitude"(!). [393] This
surely is simply to make use of the Gospels' literary or other value
in the interest of the belief in their historical credibility.

But there is still the collection of sayings, that "great authority
on the matter," from which all the Synoptics, and especially Luke
and Matthew, are supposed to have derived the material for their
declarations about Jesus. Unfortunately this is to us a completely
unknown quantity, as we know neither what this "great" authority
treats of, nor the arrangement of the matter in it, nor its text. We
can only say that this collection was written in the Aramaic tongue,
and the arrangement of its matter was not apparently chronological,
but according to the similarity of its contents. Again, it is doubtful
whether the collection was a single work, produced by one individual;
or whether it had had a history before it came to Luke and Matthew. All
the same, "the collection contains such a valuable number of the
Lord's words, that in all probability an eye-witness was its author"
(!). [394] As for the speeches of Jesus constructed from it, they were
never really made as speeches by Jesus, but owe the juxtaposition
of their contents entirely to the hand of the compiler. Thus the
much admired Sermon on the Mount is constructed by placing together
individual phrases of Jesus, which belong to all periods of his life,
perhaps made in the course of a year. The ideas running through it
and connecting the parts are not those of Jesus, but rather those
of the original community; "nevertheless, the historical value of
these speeches is, on the whole, very great indeed. Together with the
'Lord's words' of Mark they give us the truest insight into the spirit
of the Gospel"(!). [395]

Such are the authorities for the belief in an historical Jesus! If we
survey all that remains of the Gospels, this does indeed appear quite
"scanty," or, speaking plainly, pitiable. Wernle consoles himself with,
"If only it is certain and reliable." Yes, if! "And if only it was
able to give us an answer to the chief question: Who was Jesus?" [396]
This much is certain: a "Life of Jesus" cannot be written on the basis
of the testimony before us. Probably all present-day theologians are
agreed on this point; which, however, does not prevent them producing
new essays on it, at any rate for the "people," thus making up for the
lack of historical reliability by edifying effusions and rhetorical
phrases. "There is no lack of valuable historical matter, of stones for
the construction of Jesus' life; they lie before us plentifully. But
the plan for the construction is lost and completely irretrievable,
because the oldest disciples had no occasion for such an historical
connection, but rather claimed obedience to the isolated words and
acts, so far as they aroused faith." But would they have been less
faith-arousing if they had been arranged connectedly, would the
credibility of the accounts of Jesus have been diminished and not
much rather increased, if the Evangelists had taken the trouble to
give us some more information as to Jesus' real life? As things stand
at present, hardly two events are recounted in the same manner in
the Gospels, or even in the same connection. Indeed, the differences
and contradictions--and this not only as to unimportant things, such
as names, times and places, &c.--are so great that these literary
documents of Christianity can hardly be surpassed in confusion. [397]
But even this is, according to Wernle, "not so great a pity, if
only we can discover with sufficient clearness, what Jesus' actions
and wishes were on important points." [398] Unfortunately we are
not in a position to do even this. For the ultimate source of our
information, which we arrive at in our examination of the authorities
is completely unknown to us--the Aramaic collection of sayings, and
those very old traditions from which Mark is supposed to have derived
his production, gleanings of which have been preserved for us by Luke
and Matthew. But even if we knew these also, we would almost certainly
not have "come to Jesus himself." "They contain the possibility of
dispute and misrepresentation. They recount in the first place the
faith of the oldest Christians, a faith which arose in the course of
four hundred years, and moreover changed much in that time." [399]
So that at most we know only the faith of the earliest community. We
see how this community sought to make clear to itself through Jesus
its belief in the Resurrection, how it sought to "prove" to itself
and to others the divine nature of Jesus by the recital of tales
of miracles and the like. What Jesus himself thought, what he did,
what he taught, what his life was, and--might we say it?--whether he
ever lived at all--that is not to be learnt from the Gospels, and,
according to all the preceding discussion, cannot be settled from
them with lasting certainty.

Of course the liberal theologian, for whom everything is compatible
with an historical Jesus, has many resources. He explains that all
the former discussion has not touched the main point, and that
this point is--What was Jesus' attitude to God, to the world,
and to mankind? What answer did he give to the questions: What
matters in the eyes of God? and What is religion? This should
indicate that the solution of the problem is contained in what has
preceded, and that this solution is unknown to us. But such is not
the case. Wernle knows it, and examines it "in the clear light of
day." "From his numerous parables and sermons and from countless
momentary recollections it comes to us as clearly and distinctly as
if Jesus were our contemporary [!]. No man on earth can say that it
is either uncertain or obscure how Jesus thought on this point, which
is to us [viz., to the liberal theologians] even at the present day
the chief point." "And if Christianity has forgotten for a thousand
years what its Master desired first and before all, to-day [i.e.,
after the clear solutions of critical theology] it shines on us once
more from the Gospels as clearly and wonderfully, as if the sun were
newly risen, driving before its conquering rays all the phantoms and
shadows of night." [400] And so Wernle himself, to whom we owe this
consoling assurance, has written a work, "Die Anfänge unserer Religion"
(1901), which is highly esteemed in theological circles, and in which
he has given a detailed account, in a tone of overwhelming assurance,
of the innermost thoughts, views, words, and teachings of Jesus and
of his followers, just as if he had been actually present.

We must be careful of our language. These are indeed the views of
a man who must be taken seriously, with whom we have been dealing
above, a "shining light" of his science! The often cited work on
"Die Quellen des Lebens Jesu" belongs to the series of "Popular
Books on the History of Religion," which contains the quintessence of
present-day theological study, and which is intended for the widest
circles interested and instructed in religion. We may suppose, probably
with justice, that that work expresses what the liberal theology of
our day wishes the members of the community subject to it to know
and to believe. Or is it only that the popular books on the history
of religion place the intellectual standard of their readers so low
that they think they can strengthen the educated in their belief in
an historical Jesus by productions such as Wernle's? We consider the
more "scientifically" elaborated works of other important theologians
on the same subject. We think of Beyschlag, Harnack, Bernard Weiss,
of Pfleiderer, Jülicher, and Holtzmann. We consult Bousset, who
defended against Kalthoff, with such great determination and warmth,
the existence of an historical Jesus. Everywhere there is the same
half-comic, half-pathetic drama: on the one hand the evangelical
authorities are depreciated and the information is criticised away
to such an extent that hardly anything positive remains from it;
on the other hand there is a pathetic enthusiasm for the so-called
"historical kernel." Then comes praise for the so-called critical
theology and its "courageous truthfulness," which, however, ultimately
consists only in declaring evident myths and legends to be such. This
was known for a long time previously among the unprejudiced. There
usually follows a hymn to Jesus with ecstatic raising of the eyes,
as if all the statements concerning him in the Gospels still had
validity. What then does Hausrath say?--"To conceal the miraculous
parts of the [evangelical] accounts and then to give out the rest as
historical, has not hitherto passed as criticism." [401] Can we object
to Catholic theology because it looks with open pity on the whole of
Protestant "criticism," and reproaches it with the inconsistency,
incompleteness, and lack of results, which is the mark of all its
efforts to discover the beginnings of Christianity. [402] Is it not
right in rejoicing at the blow which Protestantism has sustained
and from which it must necessarily suffer through all such attempts
at accepting the Gospels as basis for a belief in an historical
Jesus? Certainly what Catholic theologians bring forward in favour
of the historical Jesus is so completely devoid of any criticism
or even of any genuine desire to elucidate the facts, that it would
be doing them too much honour to make any more detailed examination
of their works on this point. For them the whole problem has a very
simple solution in this: the existence of the historical Jesus forms
the unavoidable presupposition of the Church, even though every
historical fact should register its veto against it; and as one of
its writers has put it, that is at bottom the long-established and
unanimous view of all our inquiries into the subject under discussion:
"The historical testimony for the authenticity of the Gospels is
as old, as extensive, and as well established as it is for very
few other books of ancient literature [!]. If we do not wish to be
inconsistent we cannot question their authenticity. Their credibility
is beyond question; for their authors were eye-witnesses of the events
[!] related, or they gained their information from such; they were as
competent judges [!] as men loving the truth can well be; they could,
and in fact were obliged to speak the truth." [403]

How distinguished, as compared with this kind of theologian, Kalthoff
seems! It is true that we are obliged to allow for the one-sidedness
and insufficiency of his positive working out of the origin of
Christianity, of his attempt to explain it, on the basis of Mark's
handling of the story, purely on the lines of social motives, and to
represent Christ as the mere reflection of the Christian community and
of its experiences. Quite certainly he is wrong in identifying the
biblical Pilate with Pliny, the governor of Bithynia under Trajan,
and in the proof based on this; and this because in all probability
Pliny's letter to the Emperor is a later Christian forgery. [404]
But Kalthoff is quite right in what he says about modern critical
theology and its historical Jesus. The critical theologians may
think themselves justified in treating this embarrassing opponent as
"incompetent," or in ignoring him on account of the mistaken basis of
argument; but all the efforts made with such great perseverance and
penetration by historical theologians to derive from the authorities
before us proof of the existence of a man Jesus in the traditional
sense have led, as Kalthoff very justly says, to a purely negative
conclusion. "The numerous passages in the Gospels which this theology,
in maintaining its historical Jesus, is obliged to place on one
side and pass over, stand from a literary point of view exactly
on the same footing as those passages from which it constructs its
historical Jesus; and consequently they claim historical value equal
to these latter. The Synoptic Christ, in whom modern theology thinks
it finds the characteristics of the historical Jesus, stands not
a hair's breadth nearer to a human interpretation of Christianity
than the Christ of the fourth Gospel. What the Epigones of liberal
theology think they can distil from this Synoptic Christ as historical
essence has historical value only as a monument of masterly sophistry,
which has produced its finest examples in the name of theological
science." [405] Historical research should not have so long set apart
from all other history that of early Christianity as the special domain
of theology and handed it over to churchmen, as if for the decision
of the questions on this point quite special talent was necessary--a
talent far beyond the ordinary sphere of science and one which was
only possessed by the Church theologian. The world would then long
since have done with the whole literature of the "Life of Jesus."

The sources which give information of the origin of Christianity are
of such a kind that, considering the present standard of historical
research, no historian would care to undertake an attempt to produce
the biography of an historical Christ. [406] They are, we can add,
of such a nature that a real historian, who meets them without a
previous conviction or expectation that he will find an historical
Jesus in it, cannot for a moment doubt that he has here to do with
religious fiction, [407] with myth in an historical form, which does
not essentially differ from other myths and legends--such as perhaps
the legend of Tell.



Supplement: Jesus in Secular Literature.

There seems to be but little hope of considerably adding to the weight
of the reasons in favour of the historical existence of Jesus by citing
documents of secular literature. As is well known, only two passages of
the Jewish historian Josephus, and one in each of the Roman historians,
Tacitus and Suetonius, must be considered in this connection. As for
the testimony of Josephus in his "Antiquities," which was written
93 A.D., the first passage (viz., xviii. 3, 3) is so evidently an
after-insertion of a later age, that even Roman Catholic theologians
do not venture to declare it authentic, though they always attempt,
with pitiful naïveté, to support the credibility of pre-Christian
documents of this type. [408] But the other passage, too (xx. 9,
1), which states that James was executed under the authority of the
priest Ananos (A.D. 62), and refers to him as "the Brother of Jesus,
the so-called Christ," in the opinion of eminent theologians such as
Credner, [409] Schürer, [410] &c., must be regarded as a forgery;
[411] but even if its authenticity were established it would still
prove nothing in favour of the historical Jesus. For, first, it
leaves it undecided whether a bodily relationship is indicated by
the word "Brother," or whether, as is much more likely, the reference
is merely to a religious brotherhood (see above, 170 sq.). Secondly,
the passage only asserts that there was a man of the name of Jesus who
was called Christ, and this is in no way extraordinary in view of the
fact that at the time of Josephus, and far into the second century,
many gave themselves out as the expected Messiah. [412]

The Roman historians' testimony is in no better case than that of
Josephus. It is true that Tacitus writes in his "Annals" (xv. 44),
in connection with the persecution of the Christians under Nero (64),
that "the founder of this sect, Christ, was executed in Tiberius'
reign by the procurator Pontius Pilate"; and Suetonius states in his
biography of the Emperor Claudius, chap. xxv., that he "drove out of
Rome the Jews, who had caused great disturbances at the instigation
of Chrestus." What does this prove? Are we so certain that the passage
cited from Tacitus as to the persecution of the Christians under Nero
is not after all a later insertion and falsification of the original
text? This is indeed the case, judging from Hochart's splendid and
exhaustive inquiry. In fact, everything points to the idea that the
"first persecution of the Christians," which is previously mentioned
by no writers, either Jewish or heathen, is nothing but the product
of a Christian's imagination in the fifth century. [413] But let
us admit the authenticity of Tacitus' assertion; let us suppose
also that by Suetonius' Chrestus is really meant Christ and not a
popular Jewish rioter of that name; let us suppose that the unrest
of the Jews was not connected with the expectation of the Messiah,
or that the Roman historian, in his ignorance of the Jewish dreams of
the future, did not imagine a leader of the name of Chrestus. [414]
Can writers of the first quarter of the second century after Christ,
at which time the tradition was already formed and Christianity had
made its appearance in History as a power, be regarded as independent
authorities for facts which are supposed to have taken place long
before the birth of the Tradition? Tacitus can at most have heard
that the Christians were followers of a Christ who was supposed to
have been executed under Pontius Pilate. That was probably even at
that time in the Gospels--and need not, therefore, be a real fact
of history. And if it has been proved, according to Mommsen, that
Tacitus took his material from the protocols of the Senate and imperial
archives, there has equally been, on the other hand, a most definite
counter-assertion that he never consulted these authorities. [415]

Lately, Tacitus proving to be slightly inconsistent, it has been usual
to refer to Pliny's letter to the Emperor Trajan, asserting that the
historical Jesus is certified to in this. The letter hinges on the
question of what Pliny's attitude as Governor of Bithynia must be
to the Christians; so that naturally the Christians are much spoken
of, and once even there is mention of Christ, whose followers sing
alternate hymns to him "as to a God" (quasi deo). But Jesus as an
historical person is not once mentioned in the whole letter; and Christ
was even for Paul a "Quasi-god," a being fluctuating between man and
God. What then is proved by the letter of Pliny as to the historical
nature of Jesus? It only proves the liberal theologians' dilemma over
the whole question, that they think they can cite these witnesses
again and again for strengthening the belief in an historical Jesus,
as, e.g. Melhorn does in his work "Wahrheit und Dichtung im Leben Jesu"
(in "Aus Natur und Geisteswelt," 1906), trying to make it appear that
these witnesses are in any way worthy of consideration. Joh. Weiss
also--according to the newspaper account--in his lecture on Christ in
the Berlin vacation-course of March, 1910, confessed that "statements
from secular literature as to the historical nature of Jesus which
are absolutely free of objection are very far from having been
authenticated." Even an orthodox theologian like Kropatscheck writes
in the "Kreuzzeitung" (April 7, 1910): "It is well known that the
non-Christian writers in a very striking way ignore the appearing of
Christ. The few small notices in Tacitus, Suetonius, &c., are easily
enumerated. Though we date our chronology from him, his advent made no
impression at all on the great historians of his age. The Talmud gives
a hostile caricature of his advent which has no historical value. The
Jewish historian, Flavius Josephus, from whom we might have expected
information of the first rank, is absolutely silent. We are referred
to our Gospels, as Paul also says little of the life of Jesus; and we
can understand how it is that attempts are always being made to remove
him, as an historical person, from the past." The objection to this,
that the secular writers, even though they give no positive testimony
for Jesus' historical existence, have never brought it in question,
is of very little strength. For the writings considered in it, viz.,
Justin's conversation with the Jew Trypho, as well as the polemical
work of Celsus against Christianity, both belong to the latter half
of the second century, while the passages in the Talmud referred to
are probably of a later date, and all these passages are merely based
on the tradition. So that this "proof from silence" is in reality
no proof. It is, rather, necessary to explain why the whole of the
first century, apart from the Gospels, seems to know nothing of Jesus
as an historical personality. The Frenchman Hochart ridicules the
theological attitude: "It seems that the most distinguished men lose
a part of their brilliant character in the study of martyrology. Let
us leave it to German theologians to study history in their way. We
Frenchmen wish throughout our inquiries to preserve our clearness of
mind and healthy common-sense. Let us not invent new legends about
Nero: there are really too many already." [416]




(b) The Objections against a Denial of the Historicity of the
Synoptic Jesus.

There the matter ends: we know nothing of Jesus, of an historical
personality of that name to whom the events and speeches recorded in
the Gospels refer. "In default of any historical certainty the name
of Jesus has become for Protestant theology an empty vessel, into
which that theology pours the content of its own meditations." [417]
And if there is any excuse for this, it is that that name has never at
any time been anything but such an empty vessel: Jesus, the Christ,
the Deliverer, Saviour, Physician of oppressed souls, has been from
first to last a figure borrowed from myth, to whom the desire for
redemption and the naïve faith of the Western Asiatic peoples have
transferred all their conceptions of the soul's welfare. The "history"
of this Jesus in its general characteristics had been determined even
before the evangelical Jesus. Even Weinel, one of the most zealous
and enthusiastic adherents of the modern Jesus-worship, confesses that
"Christology was almost completed before Jesus came on earth." [418]

It was not, however, merely the general frame and outlines of the
"history" of Jesus which had been determined in the Messiah-faith,
in the idea of a divine spirit sent from God, of the "Son of Man" of
Daniel and the Jewish Apocalyptics, &c., not merely that this vague
idea was filled out with new content through the Redeemer-worship of
the neighbouring heathen peoples. Besides this, many of the individual
traits of the Jesus-figure were present, some in heathen mythology,
some in the Old Testament; and they were taken thence and worked into
the evangelical representation. There is, for instance, the story of
the twelve-year old Jesus in the Temple. "Who would have invented this
story?" asks Jeremias. "Nevertheless," he thinks it "probable" that in
this Luke was thinking of Philo's description of the life of Moses;
he calls to mind that Plutarch gives us a quite similar statement
concerning Alexander, whose life was consciously decorated with all
the traits of the Oriental King-redeemer. [419] Perhaps, however, the
account comes from a Buddhist origin. The account of the temptation of
Jesus also sounds very much like the temptation of Buddha, so far as
it is not derived from the temptation of Zarathustra by Ahriman [420]
or the temptation of Moses by the devil, of which the Rabbis told,
[421] while Jesus is said to have entered upon his ministry in his
thirtieth year, [422] because at that age the Levite was fitted for
his sacred office. [423] Till then (i.e., till his baptism) we learn
nothing of Jesus' life. Similarly Isa. liii. 2, jumps from the early
youth of the Servant of God ("He grew up as a tender plant, as a root
out of a dry ground: he hath no form nor comeliness, is despised and
rejected of men") straight to his passion and death; while the Gospels
attempt to fill in the interval from Jesus' baptism up to his passion
by painting in further so-called Messianic passages from the Old
Testament and Words of Jesus. We know how the early Christians liked
to rediscover their faith in the Scriptures and see it predicted,
and with what zeal they consequently studied the Old Testament and
altered the "history" of their Jesus to make it agree with those
predictions, thus rendering it valuable as corroboration of their own
notions. In this connection it has been shown above how the "ride of
the beardless one" influenced the collection of the tribute and his
direct attack on the shopkeepers and money-changers in the evangelical
account of Jesus' advent to the Temple at Jerusalem. [424] But the
more detailed development of this scene is determined by Zech. ix. 9,
Mal. iii. 1-3, and Isa. i. 10 sqq., and the words placed in Jesus'
mouth on this occasion are taken from Isa. lvi. 7 and Jer. vii. 1
sqq., so that this "most important" event in Jesus' life can lay no
claim to historical actuality. [425]

And again the account of the betrayal, of the thirty pieces of silver,
and of Judas' death, have their source in the Old Testament, viz.,
in the betrayal and death of Ahitophel. [426] To what extent in
particular the figures of Moses, with reference to Deut. xviii. 15
and xxxiv. 10, of Joshua, of Elijah and Elisha, influenced the
portrayal of the evangelical Jesus has also been traced even by the
theological party. [427] Jesus has to begin his activities through
baptism in the Jordan, because Moses had begun his leadership of
Israel with the passage through the Red Sea and Joshua at the time
of the Passover led the people through the Jordan, and this passage
(of the sun through the watery regions of the sky) was regarded as
baptism. [428] He has to walk on the water, even as Moses, Joshua,
and Elias walked dryshod through the water. He has to awaken the
dead, like Elijah; [429] to surround himself with twelve or seventy
disciples and apostles, just as Moses had surrounded himself with
twelve chiefs of the people and seventy elders, and as Joshua had
chosen twelve assistants at the passage of the Jordan; [430] he has
to be transfigured, [431] and to ascend into heaven like Moses [432]
and Elijah. [433] Elijah (Eli-scha) and Jeho-schua (Joshua, Jesus)
agree even in their names, so that on this ground alone it would not
have been strange if the Prophet of the Old Testament had served as
prototype of his evangelical namesake. [434] Now Jesus places himself
in many ways above the Mosaic Law, especially above the commands as
to food, [435] and in this at least one might find a trait answering
to reality. But in the Rabbinical writings we find: "It is written,
[436] the Lord sets loose that which is bound; for every creature
that passes as unclean in this world, the Lord will pronounce clean
in the next." [437] So that similarly the disposition of the Law
belongs to the general characteristics of the Messiah, and cannot be
historical of Jesus, because if it were the attitude of the Jewish
Christians to Paul on account of his disposition of the Law would
be incomprehensible. [438] The contrary attitude, which is likewise
represented by Jesus, [439] was already foreseen in the Messianic
expectation. For while some hoped for a lightening and amendment
of the Law by the Messiah, others thought of its aggravation and
completion. In Micah iv. 5 the Messiah was to exert his activity,
not merely among the Jews, but also among the Gentiles, and the
welfare of the kingdom of the Messiah was to extend also to the
latter. According to Isaiah lx. and Zechariah xiv., on the contrary,
the Gentiles were to be subjected and brought to nothing, and only
the Jews were worthy of participation in the kingdom of God. For
that reason Jesus had to declare himself with like determination for
both conceptions, [440] without any attempt being made to reconcile
the contradiction contained in this. [441] That the parents of Jesus
were called Joseph and Mary, and that his father was a "carpenter,"
were determined by tradition, just as the name of his birthplace,
Nazareth, was occasioned by the name of a sect (Nazaraios = Protector),
or by the fact that one sect honoured the Messiah as a "branch of the
root of Jesse" (nazar Isai). [442] It was a Messianic tradition that
he began his activity in Galilee and wandered about as Physician,
Saviour, Redeemer, and Prophet, as mediator of the union of Israel,
and as one who brought light to the Gentiles, not as an impetuous
oppressor full of inconsiderate strength, but as one who assumed a
loving tenderness for the weak and despairing. [443] He heals the sick,
comforts the afflicted, and proclaims to the poor the Gospel of the
nearness of the kingdom of God. That is connected with the wandering
of the sun through the twelve Signs of the Zodiac (Galil = circle),
and is based on Isa. xxxv. 5 sqq., xlii. 1-7, xlix. 9 sqq., as well
as on Isa. lxi. 1, a passage which Jesus himself, according to Luke
iv. 16 sqq., began his teaching in Nazareth by explaining. [444] He
had to meet with opposition in his work of salvation, and nevertheless
endure patiently, because of Isa. 1. 5. Naturally Jesus, behind whose
human nature was concealed a God, and to whom the pilgrim "Saviour"
Jason corresponded, [445] was obliged to reveal his true nature by
miraculous healing, and could not take a subordinate place in this
regard among the cognate heathen God-redeemers. At most we may wonder
that even in this the Old Testament had to stand [446] as a model,
and that Jesus' doings never surpass those which the heathens praise
in their gods and heroes, e.g., Asclepius. Indeed, according to
Tacitus [447] even the Emperor Vespasian accomplished such miracles
at Alexandria, where, on being persistently pressed by the people,
he healed both a lame man and a blind, and this almost in the same
way as Jesus did, by moistening their eyes and cheeks with spittle;
which information is corroborated also by Suetonius [448] and Dio
Cassius. [449] But the most marvellous thing is that the miracles
of Jesus have been found worth mentioning by the critical theology,
and that there is an earnest search for an "historical nucleus,"
which might probably "underlie them."

All the individual characteristics cited above are, however,
unimportant in comparison with the account of the Last Supper, of the
Passion, death (on the cross), and resurrection of Jesus. And yet
what is given us on these points is quite certainly unhistorical;
these parts of the Gospels owe their origin, as we have stated,
merely to cult-symbolism and to the myth of the dying and rising
divine Saviour of the Western Asiatic religions. No "genius" was
necessary for their invention, as everything was given: the derision,
[450] the flagellation, both the thieves, the crying out on the cross,
the sponge with vinegar (Psa. lxix. 22), the piercing with a lance,
[451] the soldiers casting dice for the dead man's garments, also
the women at the place of execution and at the grave, the grave in a
rock, are found in just the same form in the worship of Adonis, Attis,
Mithras, and Osiris. Even the Saviour carrying his cross is copied from
Hercules (Simon of Cyrene), [452] bearing the pillars crosswise, as
well as from the story of Isaac, who carried his own wood to the altar
on which he was to be sacrificed. [453] But where the authors of the
Gospels have really found something new, e.g., in the account of Jesus'
trial, of the Roman and Jewish procedure, they have worked it out in
such an ignorant way, and to one who knows something about it betray
so significantly the purely fictitious nature of their account, that
here really there is nothing to wonder at except perhaps the naïveté of
those who still consider that account historical, and pique themselves
a little on their "historical exactness" and "scientific method." [454]

Is not Robertson perhaps right after all in considering the whole
statement of the last fate of Jesus to be the rewriting of a dramatic
Mystery-play, which among the Gentile Christians of the larger cities
followed the sacramental meal on Easter Day? We know what a great rôle
was played by dramatic representations in numerous cults of antiquity,
and how they came into especial use in connection with the veneration
of the suffering and rising God-redeemers. Thus in Egypt the passion,
death, and resurrection of Osiris and the birth of Horus; at Eleusis
the searching and lamentation of Demeter for her lost Persephone and
the birth of Iacchus; at Lernæ in Argolis and many other places the
fate of Dionysus (Zagreus); in Sicyon the suffering of Adrastos, who
threw himself on to the funeral pyre of his father Hercules; at Amyclæ
the passing away of Nature and its new life in the fate of Hyacinth:
these were celebrated in festal pageants and scenic representations,
to say nothing of the feasts of the death and resurrection of Mithras,
Attis, and Adonis. Certainly Matthew's account, xx.-xxviii. (with the
exception of verses 11-15 in the last chapter), with its connected
sequence of events, which could not possibly have actually followed
each other like this--Supper, Gethsemane, betrayal, passion, Peter's
denial, the crucifixion, burial, and resurrection--throughout gives
one the impression of a chain of isolated dramatic scenes. And the
close of the Gospel agrees very well with this conception, for the
parting words and exhortations of Jesus to his people are a very
suitable ending to a drama. [455]

If we allow this, an explanation is given of the "clearness" which is
so generally praised in the style of the Gospels by the theologians
and their following, and which many think sufficient by itself to
prove the historical nature of the Synoptic representation of Jesus.

Of course, Wrede has already warned us "not too hastily to consider
clearness a sign of historical truth. A writing may have a very
secondary, even apocryphal character, and yet show much clearness. The
question always is how this was obtained." [456] Wernle and Wrede quite
agree that at least in Mark's production the clearness is of no account
at all, while clearness in the other Gospels is found just in those
parts which admittedly belong to the sphere of legend. And how clearly
and concretely do not our authors of the various "Lives of Jesus," not
to mention Renan, or our ministers in the pulpits describe the events
of the Gospels, with how many small and attractive traits do they
not decorate these events, in order that they should have a greater
effect on their listeners! This kind of clearness and personal stamp
is really nothing but a matter of the literary skill and imagination
of the authors in question. The writings of the Old Testament, and
not merely the historical writings, are also full of a most clear
ability for narration and of most individual characteristics,
which prove how much the Rabbinical writers in Palestine knew
of this side of literary activity. Or is anything wanting to the
clearness and individual characterisation, to which Kalthoff also
has alluded, of the touching story of Ruth; of the picture of the
prophet Jonah, of Judith, Esther, Job, &c? And then the stories of the
patriarchs--the pious Abraham, the good-natured, narrow-minded Esau,
the cunning Jacob, and their respective wives--or, to take one case,
how clear is not the meeting of Abraham's servant with Rebecca at the
well! [457] Or let us consider Moses, Elijah, Samson--great figures
who in their most essential traits demonstrably belong to myth and
religious fable! If in preaching our ministers can go so vividly into
the details of the story of the Saviour that fountains of poetry are
opened and there stream forth from their lips clear accounts of Jesus'
goodness of heart, of his heroic greatness, and of his readiness for
the sacrifice, how much more would this have been so at first in the
Christian community, when the new religion was still in its youth,
when the faith in the Messiah was as yet unweakened by sceptical
doubts, and when the heart of man was still filled with the desire
for immediate and final redemption? And even if we are confronted
with a host of minor traits, which cannot so easily be accounted for
by religious motives and poetic imagination, must these all refer to
the same real personality? May they not be based on events which are
very far from being necessarily experiences of the liberal theology's
historical Jesus? Even Edward v. Hartmann, who is generally content
to adhere to the historical Jesus, suggests the possibility "that
several historical personages, who lived at quite different times,
have contributed concrete individual characteristics to the picture of
Jesus." [458] There is a great deal of talk about the "uninventable"
in the evangelical representation. Von Soden even goes so far as to
base his chief proof for the historical existence of Jesus on this
individuality that cannot be invented. [459] As if there was any such
thing as what cannot be invented for men with imagination! And as if
all the significant details of Jesus' life were not invented on the
lines of the so-called Messianic passages in the Old Testament, in
heathen mythology, and in the imported conceptions of the Messiah! The
part that is professedly "uninventable" shrinks continuously the more
assiduously criticism busies itself with the Gospels; and the word can
at present apply only to side-issues and matters of no importance. We
are indeed faced with the strange fact, that all the essential part of
the Gospels, everything which is of importance for religious faith,
such as especially the passion, death, and resurrection of Jesus,
is demonstrably invented and mythical; but such parts as can at best
only be historical because of their supposed "uninventable" nature
are of no importance for the character of the Gospel representation!

Now, it has been shown that the Gospel picture of Jesus is not without
deficiencies. We may see a proof [460] of the historical nature of
the events referred to in small traits, as, for example, in Jesus'
temporary inability to perform miracles, [461] the circumstance that he
is not represented as omniscient, [462] the attitude of his relatives
to him. [463] So the theologian Schmiedel set up first five and then
nine passages as "clearly credible," and pronounced these to be the
basis of a really scientific knowledge of Jesus. The passages are Mark
x. 17 sqq. (Why callest thou me good?), Matt. xii. 31 sqq. (The sin
against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven), Mark iii. 21 (He is
beside himself), Mark xiii. 32 (But the day and the hour is known to
no man), Mark xv. 24 (My God, why has thou forsaken me?), Mark vi. 5
(And he could there do no mighty work), Mark viii. 12 (There shall no
sign be given unto this generation), Mark viii. 14-21 (Reproaching the
disciples on the occasion of the lack of bread), Matt. xi. 5 (The blind
see, the lame walk). All these "bases" evidently have a firm support
only on the supposition that the Gospels are meant to paint a stainless
ideal, a God, that they are at most but a conception, such, perhaps,
as has been set up by Bruno Bauer. But they are useless from the point
of view intended, as portraying a man. If, however, the Evangelists'
intention was to paint the celestial Christ of the Apostle Paul, the
God-man, the abstract spirit-being, as a completely real man for the
eyes of the faithful, to place him on the ground of historical reality,
and so to treat seriously Paul's "idea" of humanity, they were obliged
to give him also human characteristics. And these could be either
invented afresh or taken from the actual life of honoured teachers,
in which the fact is acknowledged that, even for the noblest and best
of men, there are hours of despair and grief, that the prophet is
worth nothing in his own fatherland, or is even unknown to his nearest
relatives. Even the prophet Elijah, the Old Testament precursor of
the Messiah, who has in many ways determined the picture of Jesus, is
said to have had moments of despair in which he wanted to die, till
God strengthened him anew to the fulfilment of his vocation. [464]
Moreover, Mark x. 17 was a commonplace in all ancient philosophy
from the time of Plato, and gained that form by an alteration of
the original text (A. Pott, "Der Text des Neuen Testaments nach
seiner gesch. Entwicklung" in "Aus Natur und Geisteswelt," 1906,
p. 63, sq.); Mark xiv. 24 is taken from the 22nd Psalm, which has
also in other respects determined the details of the account of the
crucifixion. Mark iii. 21 is, as Schleiermacher showed and Strauss
corroborated, a pure invention of the Evangelist, the words of the
Pharisees being put into their mouths, as their opinion, in order
to explain Jesus' answer by the assertion of his kinship (Strauss,
"Leben Jesu," i. 692; cf. also Psa. lix. 1: "I am become a stranger
unto my brethren, and an alien unto my mother's children"). Matt. xi. 5
is based on Isaiah xxxv. 5, xlii. 7, xlix. 9, lxi. 1, which runs in
the Septuagint: "The spirit of the Lord is upon me; because the Lord
hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the poor; he hath sent
me to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives,
and to the blind the opening of their eyes; to proclaim the acceptable
year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God; to comfort
all that mourn." [465] Schmiedel's nine "bases" consequently are at
most testimony to a "lost glory"; but the construction of a "really
scientific" life of Jesus cannot possibly arise from them. [466]

Clearness of exposition, then, can never afford a proof of the
historical nature of the matter concerned. And how easily is not this
clearness imported by us into the evangelical information! We are
brought up in the atmosphere of these tales, and carry about with us,
under the influence of the surrounding Christianity, an imaginary
picture of them, which we unwittingly introduce into our reading of
the Gospels. And how subjective and dependent on the reader's "taste"
the impression of clearness given by the Gospel picture of Jesus is,
to what a great extent personal predilections come in, is evidenced by
this fact, that a Vollers could not discover in the Gospels any real
man of flesh and blood, but only a "shadowy image," which he analysed
into a thaumaturgical (the miracle-worker) and a soteriological (the
Saviour) part. [467] In opposition to the efforts of the historical
theology to give Jesus a "unique" position above that of all other
founders of religions, Vollers justly remarks how difficult it
must be for the purely historical treatment to recognise these and
similar assertions. "The improbability, not to say impossibility,
of the soteriological picture is too obvious. At bottom this picture
of critical theology is nothing but the contemporary transformation
of Schleiermacher's ideal man; what must have a hundred years ago
appeared comprehensible as the product of a refined Moravianism, in
the atmosphere of Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel, is nowadays a mere
avoidance of an open and honourable analysis from the point of view
that prevails outside of theology, and is principally known in the
spheres of Nature and of History. Who would deny that the tone of the
catechism and of the pulpit, that full-sounding words of many meanings,
even the concealment and glossing over of unpleasant admissions,
play a part in this sphere such as they could never have in in any
other science?"

We are then reduced to the individual maxims and sermons of
Jesus. These must be proved to be intelligible only as the personal
experiences and thoughts of one supreme individual. Unfortunately
just this, as has already been proved, seems peculiarly doubtful. As
for Jesus' sermons, we have already understood from Wernle that
they were in any case not received from Jesus in the form in
which they have been handed down to us, but were subsequently
compiled by the Evangelists from isolated and occasional maxims of
his. [468] These single phrases and occasional utterances of Jesus
are supposed to have been taken in the last resort partly from oral
tradition, partly from the Aramaic collection--that "great source"
of Wernle's--which was translated into Greek by the Gospels. The
existence of this source has been established only very indirectly,
and we know absolutely nothing more of it. But it is self-evident
that even in the translation from one language into another much of
the originality of those "words of the Lord" must have been lost;
and, as may be shown, the different Evangelists have "translated"
the same words quite differently. Whether it will be possible to
reconstruct the original work, as critical theology is striving to
do, from the material before us, seems very questionable. And we are
given no guarantee that we have to do with actual "words of the Lord"
as they were contained in the Aramaic collection.

Even if the Evangelist is supposed to have expressed the original
meaning, what is to assure us that this phrase was spoken by Jesus
just in this way, and not in other connections, if even the phrases
were taken down as soon as uttered? But this is admittedly supposed
not to have occurred till after Jesus' death, after his Messianic
significance was clearly recognised, and after people were making
efforts to go back in memory to the Master's figure and preserve of
his sayings any that were serviceable. Bousset, indeed, in his work,
"Was wissen wir von Jesus?"--which was directed against Kalthoff--has
referred to the "good Oriental memory of the disciples." All who know
the East from personal experience are in tolerable agreement on one
point, viz., how little an Oriental is able to repeat what he has heard
or experienced in a true and objective fashion. Consequently there
are in the East no historical traditions in our sense of the word,
but all important events are decorated like a novel, and are changed
according to the necessities of the moment. Such maxims, indeed,
as "Love your enemies," "To give is more blessed than to receive,"
"No one but God is good," "Blessed are the poor," "You are the light
of the world," "Give to Cæsar that which is Cæsar's," &c., once heard
may be "not easily forgotten," as the theological phrase runs. But
also they are not of such a kind that the Jesus of liberal theology
was necessary for their invention.

We need not here take into consideration how many of Jesus' expressions
may have been imported into the Gospels from the Mystery drama, with
whose existence we must nevertheless reckon, and from which phrases
may have been changed into sayings of the "historical" Jesus. Such
obscure and high-flown passages as, e.g., Matt. x. 32 sq.; xi. 15-30,
xxvi. 64, and xxviii. 18, give one the impression of coming from the
mouth of God's representative on the stage; and this probability is
further increased when we meet quite similar expressions, such as of
the "light burden" and the "easy yoke," in the Mysteries of Mithras or
of Isis. [469] Bousset admits that all the individual words which have
been handed down to us as expressions of Jesus are "mediated by the
tradition of a community, and have passed through many hands." [470]
They are, as Strauss has observed, like pebbles which the waves of
tradition have rolled and polished, setting them down here and there
and uniting them to this and that mass. "We are," Steck remarks,
"absolutely certain of no single word of the Gospels--that it was
spoken by Jesus just in this way and in no other." [471] "It would
be very difficult," thinks Vollers, "to refer even one expression,
one parable, one act of this ideal man to Jesus of Nazareth with
historical certainty, let us say with the same certainty with which we
attribute the Epistle to the Galatians to the Apostle Paul, or explain
the Johannine Logos as the product of Greek philosophy." [472] Even one
of the leaders of Protestant orthodoxy, Professor Kähler, of Halle,
admitted, as was stated in the "Kirchliche Monatsblatt für Rheinland
und Westfalen," in a theological conference held in Dortmund, that
we possess "no single authentic word" of Jesus. Any attempt, such as
Chamberlain has made, to gather from the tradition a certain nucleus
of "words of Jesus," is consequently mistaken; and if nothing is to
be a criterion but one's personal feelings, it would be better to
confess at once that here there can be no talk of any kind of decision.

It is, then, settled that we cannot with certainty trace back to an
historical Jesus any single one of the expressions of the "Lord"
that have come down to us. Even the oldest authority, the Aramaic
collection, may have contained merely the tradition of a community. Can
we then think that the supporters of an "historical" Jesus are
right in treating it as nothing more than a "crude sin against all
historical methods," as something most monstrous and unscientific, if
one draws the only possible inference from the result of the criticism
of the Gospels, and disputes the existence at any time of an historical
Jesus? There may after all have been such a collection of "words of the
Lord" in the oldest Christian communities; but must we understand by
this words of a definite human individual? May they not rather have
been words which had an authoritative and canonical acceptation in
the community, being either specially important or congenial to it,
and which were for this reason attributed to the "Lord"--that is,
to the hero of the association or cult, Jesus? It has been generally
agreed that this was the case, for example, with the directions as to
action in the case of quarrels among the members of the community [473]
and with regard to divorce. [474] Let us also recall to our minds the
"words of the Lord" in the other cult-associations of antiquity, the
autos epha of the Pythagoreans. And how many particularly popular,
impressive, and favourite sayings were current in antiquity bearing
the names of one of the "Seven Wise Men," without any one dreaming
of ascribing to them an historical signification! How then can it
be anything but hasty and uncritical to give out the "words of the
Lord" in the collection, which are the basis of Jesus' sermons in the
Gospels, as sayings of one definite Rabbi--that is, of the "historical"
Jesus? One may have as high an opinion of Jesus' words as one likes:
the question is whether Jesus, even the Jesus of liberal theology,
is their spiritual father, or whether they are not after all in the
same position as the psalms or sayings of the Old Testament which
are current in the names of David and Solomon, and of which we know
quite positively that their authors were neither the one nor the other.

But perhaps those sayings and sermons of Jesus are of such a nature
that they could only arise from the "historical Jesus"? Of a great
number both of isolated sayings and parables of Jesus--and among
these indeed the most beautiful and the most admired, for example,
the parable of the good Samaritan, whose moral content coincides with
Deut. xxix. 1-4, of the Prodigal Son, [475] of the man that sowed--we
know that they were borrowed [476] partly from Jewish philosophy,
partly from oral tradition of the Talmud, and partly from other
sources. In any case they have no claim to originality. [477] This
holds good even of the Sermon on the Mount, which is, as has been
shown by Jewish scholars in particular, and as Robertson has once
more proved, a mere patchwork taken from ancient Jewish literature,
and, together with the Lord's Prayer, contains not a single thought
which has not its prototype in the Old Testament and in the ancient
philosophical maxims of the Jewish people. [478] Moreover, the
remaining portions, whose genesis from any other quarter is at least
as yet unproved, is not at all of such a nature that it could only
have arisen in the mind of such a personality as the theological Jesus
of Nazareth. At bottom, indeed, he neither said nor taught anything
beyond the purer morality of contemporary Judaism--to say nothing at
all of the Stoics and of the other ethical teachers of antiquity, in
particular those of the Indians. The gravest suspicion of their novelty
and originality is awakened at the Gospels' emphasising the novelty
and significance of Jesus' sayings by "the ancients said"--"but I say
unto you"; attempting thereby to make an artificial contradiction with
the former spiritual and moral standpoint of Judaism, even in places
where only a look at the Old Testament is necessary to convince us that
such a contradiction does not exist, as, for example, in the case of
the love of God and of one's neighbor. [479] Moreover, our cultivated
reverence for Jesus and the overwhelming glorification of everything
connected with him has surrounded a great many of the "words of the
Lord" with a glitter of importance which stands in no relation to
their real value, and which they would never have obtained had they
been handed down to us in another connection or under some other name.

Let us only think how much that is in itself quite trivial and
insignificant has been raised to quite an unjustifiable importance
merely through the use of the pulpit and the consecration of divine
service. Even though our theologians are not already tired of extolling
the "uniqueness," incomparability, and majesty of Jesus' words and
parables, they might nevertheless just for once consider how much
that is of little worth, how much that is mistaken, spiritually
insignificant and morally insufficient, even absolutely doubtful,
there is in what Jesus preached. [480] In this connection it has
always been the custom to extenuate the tradition by referring to the
inexactitude or to fly in the face of any genuine historical method
by tortuous elucidations of the passages in question, by unmeaning
references to the temporal and educational limitations even of the
"superman," and by suppression of the disagreeable parts.

How much trouble have not our theologians taken, and do they not even
now take, to show even one single point in Jesus' doctrines which
may justify their declaring with a good conscience his "uniqueness"
in the sense understood by them, and may justify their raising their
purely human Jesus as high as possible above his own age! Not one of
all the passages quoted to this end has been allowed to remain. The
Synoptic Jesus taught neither a new and loftier morality, nor a
"new meekness," nor a deepened consciousness of God; neither
the "indestructible value of the individual souls of men" in the
present-day individualistic sense, nor even freedom as against the
Jewish Law, nor the immanence of the kingdom of God, nor anything
else, that surpassed the capabilities of another intellectually
distinguished man of his age. Even the love, the general love, of
one's neighbour, the preaching of which is with the greater portion of
the laity the chief claim to veneration possessed by the historical
Jesus, in the Synoptics plays no very important part in Jesus' moral
conception of life; governing no wider sphere than had already been
allowed it in the Old Testament. [481] And if the pulpit eloquence
of nineteen hundred years has nevertheless attempted to lay stress
on this point, it is because it counts on the faithful not having
in mind the difference between the Gospels, and on their peacefully
permitting the Gospel of John, the one and only "gospel of love,"
which, however, is not supposed to be "historical," to be substituted
for the Synoptic Gospels. And so we actually see the glorification of
Jesus' doctrines which, a short time ago, flourished so luxuriantly,
appearing recently in more and more moderate terms. [482]

Thus it was for a time customary in theology, under the influence of
Holtzmann and Harnack, to consider the ethical deepening and return
of God's "fatherly love" as the essentially new and significant
point in Jesus' "glad tidings," and to write about it in unctuous
phrases. Recently, even this seems to have been abandoned, as,
for example, Wrede openly confesses, with respect to the "filiation
to God," that this conception existed in Judaism very long before
Christ; also that Jesus did not especially preach God as the loving
"Father" of each individual, that indeed he did not once place in
the foreground the name of God as the Father. [483] But so much
the more decidedly is reference made to the "enormous effects"
which attended Jesus' appearance, and the attempt is made to prove
from them his surpassing greatness, "uniqueness," and historical
reality. As if Zarathustra, Buddha, and Mohammed had achieved less,
as if the effects which proceed from a person must stand in a certain
relation to his human significance, and as if those effects were
to be ascribed to the "historical" and not rather to the mythical
Jesus--that is, to the idea of the God sacrificing himself for
humanity! As a matter of fact, his faith in the immediate proximity
of the Messianic kingdom of God, and the demand for a change of life
based on this, which is really "unique" in the traditional Jesus,
is without any religious and ethical significance for us, and is at
most only of interest for the history of civilisation. On the other
hand, such part of his teaching as is still of importance to us is
not "unique," and only has the reputation of being so because we are
accustomed by a theological education to treat it in the light of the
Christian dogmatic metaphysics of redemption. Plato, Seneca, Epictetus,
Laotse, or Buddha in their ethical views are not behind Jesus with his
egoistical pseudo-morals, his basing moral action on the expectation
of reward and punishment in the future, his narrow-minded nationalism,
which theologians in vain attempt to debate away and to conceal; and
his obscure mysticism, which strives to attain a special importance for
its maxims by mysterious references to his "heavenly Father." [484]
And as for the "great impression" which Jesus is supposed to have
made on his own people and on the following age, and without which
the history of Christianity is supposed to be inexplicable, Kalthoff
has shown with justice that the Gospels do not in any way reflect the
impression which a person produced, but only such as the accounts of
Jesus' personality would have made on the members of the Christian
community. "Even the strongest impression proves nothing as to the
historical truth of these accounts. Even an account of a fictitious
personage may produce the deepest impression on a community if it
is given in historical terms. What an impression Goethe's "Werther"
produced, though the whole world knew that it was only a romance! Yet
it stirred up countless disciples and imitators." [485]

In this we have at the same time a refutation of the popular objection
that to deny the historical existence of Jesus is to misunderstand
"the significance of personality in the historical life of peoples
and religions." Certainly, as Mehlhorn says, active devotion above
all is enkindled to persons in whom this personality strikes us in an
evident, elevating, and animating way. [486] But in order to enkindle
devotion and faith in Jesus Christ the elevating personality of a Paul
sufficed, whether or not he was the author of the epistles current
in his name; the missionary activity of apostles, working, like him,
in the service of the Jesus-creed, was enough, since they moved
from place to place, and, often undergoing great personal sacrifice
and privation, with danger to their own lives demanded adoration of
the new God. Those in need of redemption could never find any real
religious support outside of the faith in a divine redeemer, they
could never find satisfaction and deliverance but in the idea of the
God sacrificing himself for mankind--the God whose redeeming power and
whose distinct superiority to the other Mystery-deities the apostles
could portray in such a lively and striking fashion. That an idea
can only be effective and fruitful by means of a great personality
is a barren formula. [487] In thinking they can with this argument
support their faith in an historical Jesus liberal theologians avail
themselves of an irrelevant bit of modern street-philosophy without
noticing that in their case it proves nothing at all. Where, then,
is the "great personality" which gave to Mithraism such an efficacy
that in the first century of our era it was able to conquer from the
East almost the whole of the West and to make it doubtful for a time
whether the world was to be Mithraic or Christian? In such influential
religions as those of Dionysus and Osiris, or indeed in Brahmanism,
we cannot speak of great personalities as their "founders"; and as
for Zarathustra, the pretended founder of the Persian, and Moses, the
founder of the Israelite religion, they are not historical persons;
while the views of different investigators differ as to the historical
existence of the reputed founder of Buddhism. Of course, even in
the above-mentioned religions the particular ideas would have been
brought forward by brilliant individuals, and the movements depending
on them would have been first organised and rendered effective by men
of energy and purpose. But the question is whether persons of this
type are necessarily "great," even "unique," in the sense of liberal
theology, in order to be successful. So that to set aside Paul, whose
inspiring personality gifted with a genius for organisation we know
from his epistles,--to set him aside in favour of an imaginary Jesus,
to base the importance of the Christian religion on the "uniqueness"
of its supposed founder, and to base this uniqueness in turn on the
importance of the religious movement which resulted from it, is to
abandon the critical standpoint and to turn about in circles. "It is
an empty assertion," says Lützelberger, "without any real foundation,
that the invention of such a person as the Gospels give us in their
Jesus would have been quite impossible, as we find in him such a
peculiar and sharply defined character that imagination would never
have been able to invent and adhere to it. For the personality which
meets us in the Gospels is by no means one that is sharply drawn and
true to itself; but the story shows us rather a man who from quite
different mental tendencies spoke now one way and now another, and
is perfectly different in the first and fourth Gospels. Only with
the greatest trouble can a homogeneous and coherent whole be formed
from the descriptions in the Gospels. So that we are absolutely
wrong in concluding from the originality of the person of Christ
in the Gospels to their historical credibility." The conclusion is
much more justifiable that if such a person with such a life-history
and such speech had stood at the beginning of the Christian Church,
the history of its development must have been quite a different one,
just as the history of Judaism would have been different if a Moses
with his Law had stood at its head. [488]

And now if we compare the praises of Buddha in the Lalita Vistara with
the description of Jesus' personality given in the New Testament, we
will be convinced how similarly--even if we exclude the hypothesis of
a direct influence--and under what like conditions the kindred religion
took shape: "In the world of creatures, which was long afflicted by the
evils of natural corruption, thou didst appear, O king of physicians,
who redeemest us from all evil. At thy approach, O guide, unrest
disappears, and gods and men are filled with health. Thou art the
protector, the firm foundation, the chief, the leader of the world,
with thy gentle and benevolent disposition. Thou art the best of
physicians, who bringest the perfect means of salvation and healest
suffering. Distinguished by thy compassion and sympathy, thou governest
the things of the world. Distinguished by thy strength of mind and
good works, completely pure, thou hast attained to perfection, and,
thyself redeemed, thou wilt, as the prophet of the four truths, redeem
other creatures also. The power of the Evil One has been overcome
by wisdom, courage, and humility. Thou hast brought it about,--the
highest and immortal glory. We greet thee as the conqueror of the
army of the Deceiver. Thou whose word is without fault, who freest
from error and passion, hast trod the path of eternal life; thou dost
deserve in heaven and on earth honour and homage unparalleled. Thou
quickenest Gods and men with thy clear words. By the beams which go
forth from thee thou art the conqueror of this universe, the Master of
Gods and men. Thou didst appear, Light of the Law, destroyer of misery
and ignorance, completely filled with humility and majesty. Sun, moon,
and fires no longer shine before thee and thy fulness of imperishable
glory. Thou who teachest us to know truth from falsehood, ghostly
leader with the sweetest voice, whose spirit is calm, whose passions
are controlled, whose heart is perfectly at rest, who teachest what
should be taught, who bringest about the union of gods and men: I
greet thee, Sakhyamuni, as the greatest of men, as the wonder of the
three thousand worlds, who deservest honour and homage in heaven and on
earth, from Gods and men!" Where, then, is the "uniqueness" of Jesus,
into which the future divinity of the World-redeemer has disappeared
for modern critical theology, and into which it has striven to import
all the sentimental considerations which once belonged to the "God-man"
in the sense of the Church dogma? "Nothing is more negative than the
result of the inquiry into the life of Jesus. The Jesus of Nazareth,
who appeared as the Messiah, who proclaimed the morals of the kingdom
of God, who founded the kingdom of heaven upon earth, and died to
give consecration to his acts, never existed. He is a figure which was
invented by Rationalism, restored by Liberalism, and painted over with
historical science by modern theologians." With these words of the
theologian Schweitzer [489] the present inquiry may be said to agree.

In fact, in the Gospels we have nothing but the expression of the
consciousness of a community. In this respect the view supported
by Kalthoff is completely right. The life of Jesus, as portrayed by
the Synoptics, merely brings to an expression in historical garb the
metaphysical ideas, religious hopes, the outer and inner experiences
of the community which had Jesus for its cult-god. His opinions,
statements, and parables only reflect the religious-moral conceptions,
the temporary sentiments, the casting down and the joy of victory,
the hate and the love, the judgments and prejudices of the members of
the community, and the differences and contradictions in the Gospels
prove to be the developing material of the conception of the Messiah
in different communities and at different times. Christ takes just
the same position in the religious-social brotherhoods which are named
after him as Attis has in the Phrygian, Adonis in the Syrian, Osiris
in the Egyptian, Dionysus, Hercules, Hermes, Asclepius, &c., in the
Greek cult-associations. He is but another form of these club-gods
or patrons of communities, and the cult devoted to him shows in
essentials the same forms as those devoted to the divinities above
named. The place of the bloody expiatory sacrifice of the believers
in Attis, wherein they underwent "baptism of blood" in their yearly
March festival, and wherein they obtained the forgiveness of their
sins and were "born again" to a new life, was in Rome the Hill of
the Vatican. In fact, the very spot on which in Christian times the
Church of Peter grew above the so-called grave of the apostle. It
was at bottom merely an alteration of the name, not of the matter,
when the High Priest of Attis blended his rôle with that of the High
Priest of Christ, and the Christ-cult spread itself from this new
point far over the other parts of the Roman Empire.




(c) The True Character of the Synoptic Jesus.

The Synoptic Gospels leave open the question whether they treat
of a man made God or of a God made man. The foregoing account has
shown that the Jesus of the Gospels is to be understood only as a
God made man. The story of his life, as presented in the Gospels,
is the rendering into history of a primitive religious myth. Most
of the great heroes of the legend, which passes as historical, are
similar incarnate Gods--such as Jason, Hercules, Achilles, Theseus,
Perseus, Siegfried, &c.; in these we have nothing but the old Aryan
sun--champion in the struggle against the powers of darkness and of
death. That primitive Gods in the view of a later age should become
men, without, however, ceasing to be clothed with the glamour of the
deity, is to such an extent the ordinary process, that the reverse,
the elevation of men to Gods, is as a rule only found in the earliest
stages of human civilisation, or in periods of moral and social decay,
when fawning servility and worthless flattery fashion a prominent man,
either during his life or after his death, into a divine being. Even
the so-called "Bible Story" contains numerous examples of such God
made men: the patriarchs, Joseph, Joshua, Samson, Esther, Mordecai,
Haman, Simon Magus, the magician Elymas, &c., were originally pure
Gods, and in the description of their lives old Semitic star-myths and
sun-myths obtained a historical garb. If we cannot doubt that Moses,
the founder of the old covenant, was a fictitious figure, and that his
"history" was invented by the priests at Jerusalem only for the purpose
of sanctioning and basing on his authority the law of the priests named
after him; if for this end the whole history of Israel was falsified,
and the final event in the religious development of Israel, i.e., the
giving of the Law, was placed at the beginning--why cannot what was
possible with Moses have been repeated in the case of Jesus? Why may
not also the founder of the new covenant as an historical person belong
entirely to pious legend? According to Herodotus, [490] the Greeks also
changed an old Phoenician God, Hercules, for national reasons, into a
native hero, the son of Amphitryon, and incorporated him in their own
sphere of ideas. Let us consider how strong the impulse was, especially
among Orientals, to make history of purely internal experiences and
ideas. To carry historical matter into the sphere of myth, and to
conceive myth as history, is, as is shown by the investigations of
Winckler, Schrader, Jensen, &c., for the Orientals such a matter of
course, that, as regards the accounts in the Old Testament, it is
hardly possible to distinguish their genuinely "historical nucleus"
from its quasi-historical covering. And it is more especially the
Semitic thought of antiquity which proves to be completely unable
to distinguish mythical phantasy from real event! It is, indeed,
too often said that the Semite produced and possessed no mythology
of his own, as Renan asserted; and no doubt at all is possible that
they could not preserve as such and deal with the mythical figures and
events whencesoever they derived them, but always tended to translate
them into human form and to associate them with definite places and
times. "The God of the Semites is associated with place and object,
he is a Genius loci," says Winckler. [491] But if ever a myth required
to be clothed in the garment of place and the metaphysical ideas
contained in it to be separated into a series of historical events,
it was certainly the myth of the God sacrificing himself for humanity,
who sojourned among men in human form, suffered with the rest of men
and died, returning, after victoriously overcoming the dark powers
of death, to the divine seat whence he set out.

We understand how the God Jesus, consequent on his symbolical
unification with the man sacrificed in his stead, could come to be
made human, and how on this basis the faith in the resurrection of God
in the form of an historical person could arise. But how the reverse
process could take place, how the man Jesus could be elevated into a
God, or could ever fuse with an already existing God of like name into
the divine-human redeemer--indeed, the Deity--that is and remains, as
we have already said, a psychological puzzle. The only way to solve
it is to refer to the "inscrutable secrets of the Divine will." In
what other way can we explain how "that simple child of man, as he has
been described," could so very soon after his death be elevated into
that "mystical being of imagination," into that "celestial Christ,"
as he meets us in the epistles of Paul? There can only have been at
most seven, probably three, years, according to a recent estimate
hardly one year, between the death of Jesus and the commencement
of Paul's activity. [492] And this short time is supposed to have
sufficed to transform the man Jesus into the Pauline Christ! And
not only Paul is supposed to have been able to do this; even Jesus'
immediate disciples, who sat with him at the same table, ate and drank
with him, knowing then who Jesus was, are supposed to have declared
themselves in agreement with this, and to have prayed to him whom they
had always seen praying to the "Father"! Certainly in antiquity the
deification of a man was nothing extraordinary: Plato and Aristotle
were, after their death, honoured by their pupils as god-like beings;
Demetrius Poliorcetes, Alexander, the Ptolemies, &c., had divine
honours rendered to them even during their lives. But this style of
deification is completely different from that which is supposed to
have been allotted to Jesus. It is merely an expression of personal
gratitude and attachment, of overflowing sentiment and characterless
flattery, and never obtained any detailed theological formulation. It
was the basis for no new religion. Schopenhauer has very justly pointed
out the contradiction between Paul's apotheosis of Jesus and usual
historical experience, and remarked that from this consideration
could be drawn an argument against the authenticity of the Pauline
epistles. [493] In fact, Holtzmann considers, with reference to this
assertion of the philosopher's, the question "whether the figure of
Jesus attaining such colossal dimensions in Paul's sight may not be
taken to establish the distance between the two as that of only a few
years, if there was not immediate temporal contact," as the question
"most worthy of discussion, which the critics of the Dutch school have
propounded for consideration." [494] According to the prevalent view of
critical theologians, as presented even by Pfleiderer, the apparitions
of the "Lord," which after Jesus' death were seen by the disciples
who had fled from Jerusalem, the "ecstatic visionary experiences,
in which they thought they saw their crucified Master living and
raised up to heavenly glory," were the occasion of their faith in
the resurrection, and consequently of their faith in Jesus' divine
rôle as Redeemer. [495] Pathological states of over-excited men and
hysterical women are then supposed to form the "historical foundation"
for the genesis of the Christian religion! And with such opinions they
think themselves justified in looking down on the rationalist of the
eighteenth-century Enlightenment with supreme contempt, and in boasting
of the depth to which their religious-historical insight reaches! But
if we really admit, with historical theology, this more than doubtful
explanation, which degrades Christianity into the merely chance product
of mental excitement, at once the further question arises as to how
the new religion of the small community of the Messiah at Jerusalem
was able to spread itself abroad with such astounding rapidity that,
even so soon as at most two decades after Jesus' death, we meet
with Christian communities not only over the whole of Western Asia,
but also in the islands of the Mediterranean, in the coast-towns of
Greece, even in Italy, at Puteoli, and in Rome; and this at a time
when as yet not a line had been written about the Jewish Rabbi. [496]
Even the theologian Schweitzer is obliged to confess of historical
theology that "until it has in some way explained how it was that,
under the influence of the Jewish sect of the Messiah, Greek and
Roman popular Christianity appeared at all points simultaneously,
it must admit a formal right of existence to all hypotheses, even the
most extravagant, which seek to attack and solve this problem." [497]

If in all this it is shown to be possible, or even probable, that
in the Jesus of the Gospels we have not a deified man, but rather a
humanised God, there remains but to find an answer to the question as
to what external reasons led to the transplanting of the God Jesus into
the soil of historical actuality and the reduction of the eternal or
super-historical fact of his redeeming death and of his resurrection
into a series of temporal events.

This question is answered at once if we turn our attention to the
motives present in the earliest Christian communities known to us,
which motives appear in the Acts and in the Pauline epistles. From
these sources we know at what an early stage an opposition arose
between Paul's Gentile Christianity and the Jewish Christianity,
the chief seat of which was at Jerusalem, and which for this reason,
as we can understand, claimed for itself a special authority. As
long as the former persecutor of the Christian community, over whose
conversion they could not at first rejoice too much, [498] did not
obstruct others and seemed to justify his apostolic activity by his
success among the Gentiles, they left him to go his way. But when
Paul showed his independence by his reserve before the "Brothers"
at Jerusalem, and began to attract the feelings of those at Jerusalem
by his abrogation of the Mosaic Law, then they commenced to treat him
with suspicion, to place every obstacle in the way of his missionary
activity, and to attempt, led by the zealous James, to bring the
Pauline communities under their own government. Then, seeking a
title for the practice of the apostolic vocation, they found it in
this--that every one who wished to testify to Christ must himself
have seen him after his resurrection.

But Paul could very justly object that to him also the transfigured
Jesus had appeared. [499] Then they made the justification for the
apostolic vocation consist in this, that an apostle must not only
have seen Christ risen up, but must also have eaten and drunk with
him. [500] This indeed was not applicable in the case of Judas, who in
the Acts i. 16 is nevertheless counted among the apostles; and it was
also never asserted of Matthias, who was chosen in the former's stead,
that he had been a witness of Jesus' resurrection. Much less even does
he seem to have fulfilled the condition to which advance was made in
the development of the original idea, i.e., that an apostle of Jesus
should have been personally acquainted with the living Jesus, that he
should have belonged to the "First Apostles" and have been present as
eye-witness and hearer of Jesus' words from the time of John's baptism
up to the Resurrection and Ascension. [501] Now Seufert has shown
that the passage of the Acts referred to is merely a construction,
a transference of later conditions to an earlier epoch; and that the
whole point of it is to paralyse Paul's mission to the Gentiles and
to establish the title of the Jew-Christians at Jerusalem as higher
than that of his followers.

If with this purpose, as Seufert showed, the organisation of the
Apostleship of Twelve arose--an organisation which has no satisfactory
basis or foundation in the Gospels or in the Pauline epistles--then it
is from this purpose also that we can find cause for the God Jesus to
become a human founder of the apostleship. "An apostle was to be only
such an one as had seen and heard Jesus himself, or had learnt from
those who had been his immediate disciples. A literature of Judaism
arose which had at quite an early stage the closest interest in the
historical determination of Jesus' life; and this formed the lowest
stratum on which our canonical Gospels are based." [502] Judaism in
general, and the form of it at Jerusalem in particular, needed a legal
title on which to base its commanding position as contrasted with the
Gentile Christianity of Paul; and so its founders were obliged to have
been companions of Jesus in person, and to have been selected for their
vocation by him. For this reason Jesus could not remain a mere God,
but had to be drawn down into historical actuality. Seufert thinks
that the tracing of the Apostleship of Twelve back to an "historical"
Jesus, and the setting up of the demand for an apostle of Jesus to
have been a companion of his journeying, took place in Paul's lifetime
in the sixth, or perhaps even in the fifth decade. [503] In this he
presupposes the existence of an historical Jesus, while the Pauline
epistles themselves contain nothing to lead one to believe that the
transformation of the Jesus-faith into history took place in Paul's
lifetime. In early Christianity exactly the same incident took place
here, on the soil of Palestine and at Jerusalem, as took place later in
"eternal" Rome, when the bishop of this city, in order to establish
his right of supremacy in the Church, proclaimed himself to be the
direct successor of the Apostle Peter, and caused the "possession of
the keys" to have been given to this latter by Jesus himself. [504]

So that there were very mundane and very practical reasons which
after all gave the impulse for the God Jesus to be transformed into
an historical individual, and for the central point of his action,
the crisis in his life, his death and his resurrection, which alone
affected religious considerations, to be placed in the capital of
the Jewish state, the "City of God," the Holy City of David, of the
"ancestors" of the Messiah, with which now the Jews connected religious
salvation. But how could this fiction succeed and maintain its ground,
so that it was able to become an absolutely vital question for the
new religion, an indestructible dogma, a self-evident "fact," so
that its very calling in question seems to the critical theologians
of our time a perfect absurdity?

Before we can answer this question we must turn our attention to the
Gnostic movement and its relations to the growing Church.




(d) Gnosticism and the Johannine Jesus.

Christianity was originally developed from Gnosticism (Mandaism). The
Pauline religion was only one form of the many syncretising efforts
to satisfy contemporary humanity's need of redemption by a fusion
of religious conceptions derived from different sources. So much the
greater was the danger which threatened to spring up on this side of
the youthful Church.

Gnosticism agreed with Christianity in its pessimistic valuation of
the world, in its belief in the inability of man to obtain religious
salvation by himself, in the necessity for a divine mediation of
"Life." Like Christianity, it expected the deliverance of the oppressed
souls of men by a supernatural Redeemer. He came down from Heaven
upon earth and assumed a human form, establishing, through a mystic
union with himself, the connection between the spheres of heaven and
earth. He thereby guarantees to mankind an eternal life in a bliss
to come. Gnosticism also involves a completely dualistic philosophy
in its opposition of God and world, of spirit and matter, of soul
and body, &c.; but all its efforts are directed to overcoming these
contradictions by supernatural mediation and magical contrivances. It
treats the "Gnosis," the knowledge, the proper insight into the
coherence of things, as the necessary condition of redemption. The
individual must know that his soul comes from God, that it is only
temporarily confined in this prison of the body, and that it is
intended for something higher than to be lost here in the obscurity
of ignorance, of evil and of sin; so that he is already freed from
the trammels of the flesh, and finds a new life for himself. The
God-Redeemer descended upon earth to impart this knowledge to mankind;
and Gnosticism pledges itself, on the basis of the "revelation"
received directly from God, to open to those who strive for the
highest knowledge all the heights and depths of Heaven and of earth.

This Gnosticism of the first century after Christ was a wonderfully
opalescent and intricate structure--half religious speculation, half
religion, a mixture of Theosophy, uncritical mythological superstition,
and deep religious mysticism. In it Babylonian beliefs as to Gods and
stars, Parsee mythology, and Indian doctrines of metempsychosis and
Karma were combined with Jewish theology and Mystery-rites of Western
Asia; and through the whole blew a breath of Hellenic philosophy,
which chiefly strove to fix the fantastic creatures of speculation
in a comprehensible form, and to work up the confusion of Oriental
licence and extravagance of thought into the form of a philosophical
view of the world. The Gnostics also called their mediating deity,
as we have already seen of the Mandaic sect of the Nassenes, "Jesus,"
and indulged in a picture rendering of his pre-worldly existence and
supernatural divine majesty. They agreed with the Christians that
Jesus had been "human."

The extravagant metaphysical conception which they had of Jesus at
the same time prevented them from dealing seriously with the idea of
his manhood. So that they either maintained that the celestial Christ
had attached himself to the man Jesus in a purely external way, and
indeed, first on the occasion of the baptism in the Jordan, and only
temporarily, i.e., up to the Passion--it being only the "man" Jesus
who suffered death (Basilides, Cerinthus); or they thought of Jesus as
having assumed merely a ghostly body--and consequently thought that all
his human actions took place merely as pure appearance (Saturninus,
Valentinus, Marcion). But how little they managed to penetrate into
the centre of the Christian doctrine of redemption and to value the
fundamental significance of the Christ-figure, is shown by the fact
that they thought of Christ merely as one mediator among countless
others. It is shown also by the romantic and florid description of the
spirits or "æons," who are supposed to travel backwards and forwards
between heaven and earth, leading their lives apart. These played a
great part in the Gnostic systems.

It was a matter of course that the Christian faith had to take
exception to such a fantastic and external treatment of the idea of
the God-man. The Pauline Christianity was distinct from Gnosticism,
with which it was most closely connected, just in this, that it was
in earnest with the "manhood" of Jesus. It was still more serious
that the Gnostics combined with their extreme dualism an outspokenly
anti-Jewish character. For this in the close relationship between
Gnosticism and Christianity would necessarily frighten the Jews from
the Gospel, and incite only too many against the young religion. But
the Jews formed the factor with which early Christianity had first of
all to reckon. In addition to this the Gnostics, from the standpoint of
their spiritualistic conception of God, turned to contempt of the world
and asceticism. They commended sexual continence, rejected marriage,
and wished to know nothing either of Christ's or of man's bodily
resurrection. But in the West no propaganda of an ascetic religion
could succeed. And yet even with the Gnostics, as is so often the
case, asceticism only too frequently degenerated into unbridled
voluptuousness and libertinage, and the spiritual pride of those
chosen by God to knowledge, who were raised above the Mosaic Law,
threatened completely to tear apart the connection with Judaism
by its radical criticism of the Old Testament. In this Gnosticism
not only undermined the moral life of the communities, but also
brought the Gospel into discredit in other parts of the world. As
an independent religion, which expressly opposed all other worships,
and the adherents of which withdrew from the religious practices of
the State, even from any political activity whatsoever, Christianity
brought on itself the suspicion of the authorities and the hate of
the people, and incurred the prohibition of new religions and secret
sects (lex Julia majestatis). [505] So that Gnosticism, by taking it
from its Jewish native soil, drove Christianity into a conflict with
the Roman civil laws.

All these dangers, which threatened Christianity from the Gnostic
movement, were set aside in one stroke by the recognition of the true
"manhood" of Jesus, the assertion of the "historical" Jesus. This
preserved the connection, so important for the unhindered spread of
Christianity in the Roman Empire, with Judaism and its "revealed"
legality--the heteronomous and ritualistic character of which
had indeed been shown by Paul, and the moral content of which was
nevertheless adhered to by the Christians even later. It was made
possible, in default of any previous written documents of revelation,
even yet to regard the Old Testament in essentials as the authoritative
book of the new faith, and as a preparatory testimony to the final
revelation which appeared in Jesus. And most of all, it put a check
on Gnostic phantasy, in drawing together the perplexing plurality of
the Gnostic æons into the one figure of the World-redeemer and Saviour
Christ, in making the chief dogma the redeeming sacrificial death of
the Messiah, and in concentrating the religious man's attention on
this chief turning-point of all the historical events. This was the
reason why the Apologists and "Fathers" of Christianity, Ignatius,
Polycarp, Justin, Irenæus, &c., spoke with such decision in favour
of the actuality and true manhood of Jesus. It was not perhaps a
better historical knowledge which caused them to do this, but the
life-instinct of the Church, which knew only too well that its own
position and the prosecution of its religious task, in contrast with
the excitements of Gnosticism and its seductive attempts to explain
the world, was dependent on the belief in an historical Redeemer. So
the historical Jesus was from the beginning a dogma, a fiction,
caused by the religious and practical social needs, of the growing
and struggling Christian Church. This Jesus has, indeed, led it to
victory; not, however, as an historical reality, but as an idea; or,
in other words, not an historical Jesus, in the proper sense of the
word, a really human individual, but the pure idea of such a person,
is the patron-saint, the Genius of ecclesiastical Christianity, the
man who enabled it to overcome Gnosticism, Mithraism, and the other
religions of the Redeemer-Gods of Western Asia.

The importance of the fourth Gospel rests in having brought to
a final close these efforts of the Church to make history of the
Redeemer-figure Christ. Begun under the visible influence of the
Gnostic conception of the process of redemption, it meets Gnosticism
later as another Gospel; indeed, it seems saturated through and
through with the Gnostic attitude and outlook. To a certain degree
it shares with Gnosticism its anti-Jewish character. But at the same
time it adheres, with the Synoptics, to Jesus' historical activity,
and seeks to establish a kind of mediation between the essentially
metaphysical conception of the Gnostics and the essentially human
conception of the Synoptic Gospels.

The author who wrote the Gospel in the name of John, the "favourite
disciple of Jesus," probably about 140 A.D., agrees with Gnosticism in
its dualistic conception of the universe. On one side is the world,
the kingdom of darkness, deceit, and evil, in deadly enmity to the
divine kingdom of light, the kingdom of truth and life. At the head
of the divine kingdom is God, who is himself Light, Truth, Life,
and Spirit--following Parsee thought. At the head of the kingdom of
earth is Satan (Angromainyu). In the middle, between them, is placed
man. But mankind is also divided, as all the rest of existence,
into two essentially different kinds. The souls of the one part of
mankind are derived from God, those of the other from Satan. The
"children of God" are by nature destined for the good and are fit for
redemption. The "children of Satan"--among whom John, in agreement
with the Gnostics, counts the Jews before all--are not susceptible
of anything divine and are assigned to eternal damnation. In order to
accomplish redemption, God, from pure "Love" for the world, selected
Monogenes, his only-begotten Son, that is, the only being which, as the
child of God, was produced not by other beings, but by God himself. The
author of the Gospel fuses Monogenes with the Philonic Logos, who
in the Gnostic conception was only one of countless other æons, and
was a son of Monogenes, the divine reason, and so only a grandson
of God. At the same time, he transfers the whole "pleroma"--the
plurality of the æons into which, in the Gnostic conception, the
divine reality was divided--to the single principle of the Logos,
defines the Logos as the unique bearer of the whole fulness of divine
glory, as the pre-existent creator of the world; and calls him also,
since he is in essence identical with God his "Father," the source
of life, the light, the truth, and the spirit of the universe.

And how then does the Logos bring about redemption? He becomes flesh,
that is, he assumes the form of the "man" Jesus, without, however,
ceasing to be the supernatural Logos, and as such brings to men the
"Life" which he himself is, by revealing wisdom and love. As revealer
of wisdom he is the "light of the world"; he opens to men the secret
of their filial relation to God; he teaches them, by knowing God,
to understand themselves and the world; he collects about himself the
children of God, who are scattered through the world, in a united and
brotherly society; and gives them, in imitating his own personality,
the "light of life"--that is, he inwardly enlightens and elevates
them. As revealer of love he not only assumes the human form and
the renunciation of his divine bliss connected with it, but as a
"good shepherd" he lays down his life for his flock; he saves them
from the power of Satan, from the terrors of darkness, and sacrifices
himself for his people, in order through this highest testimony of
his love for men, through the complete surrender of his life, to
regain the life which he really is, and to return to his celestial
glory. This is the meaning of Christ's work of redemption, that men
by faith and love become inwardly united with him and so with God;
whereby they gain the "life" in the higher spirit. For though Christ
himself may return to God, his spirit still lives on earth. As the
"second Paraclete" or agent, the Spirit proceeds with the Saviour's
work of redemption, arouses and strengthens the faith in Christ and
the love for him and for the Brotherhood, thereby mediating for them
the "Life," and leading them after their death into the eternal bliss.

In all this the influence of Gnosticism and of the Philonic doctrine
of the Logos is unmistakable, and it is very probable that the
author of the fourth Gospel was influenced by the recollection,
still living at Ephesus, of the Ephesian Heraclitus' Logos, in his
attachment to Philo and to the latter's more detailed exposition of the
Hellenic Logos-philosophy. But he fundamentally differs from Philo and
Gnosticism in his assertion that the Logos "was made flesh," sojourned
on earth in the figure of Jesus of Nazareth, and suffered death. It
is true, however, that the Evangelist is more persistent in this
assertion than successful in delineating a real man, notwithstanding
his use of the Synoptic accounts of the personal fate of Jesus. The
idea of the divine nature of the Saviour is the one that prevails
in his writings. The "historical picture" which came down to him was
forcibly rectified, and the personality of Jesus was worked up into
something so wonderful, extraordinary, and supernatural that, if we
were in possession of the fourth Gospel alone, in all probability the
idea would hardly have occurred to any one that it was a treatment
of the life-story of an historical individual. And yet in this the
difference between the Johannine and the Synoptic Gospels is only a
slight one. For the Synoptic Jesus also is not really a man, but a
"superman," the original Christian community's God-man, cult-hero,
and mediator of salvation. And if it is settled that the quarrel
between the Church teachers and the Gnostic heretics hinged, not
on the divinity of Christ, in which they agreed, but rather on the
kind and degree of his humanity, then this "paradoxical fact" is
by itself sufficient to corroborate the assertion that the divinity
of the mediator of redemption was the only originally determined and
self-evident presupposition of the whole Christian faith; and that, on
the contrary, his humanity was doubtful even in the earliest times, and
for this reason alone could become a subject of the bitterest strife.

Indeed, even the author of the fourth Gospel did not bring about a real
fusion between the human person Jesus and the mythological person, the
Gnostic Son of God, who with Philo wavered, also in the form of the
Logos, between impersonal being and allegorical personality. All the
efforts to render comprehensible "the interfusion of the divine and the
human in the unity of the personal, its basis (essence) being divine,
its appearance a human life of Jesus," are frustrated even with the
so-called John by one fact. This fact is that a Logos considered as
a person can never be at once a human personality and yet have as its
basis and essence a divine personality, but can only be demoniacally
possessed by this latter, and can never be this latter itself. And so,
as Pfleiderer says, the Johannine Christ wavers throughout "between
a sublime truth and a ghostly monstrosity; the former, in so far as
he represents the ideal of the Son of God, and so the religion of
mankind, separated from all the accidents and limits of individuality
and nationality, of space and time--and the latter so far as he is the
mythical covering of a God sojourning on earth in human form." [506]

It is true that this fusion of the Gnostic Son of God and the Philonic
Logos with the Synoptic Jesus first fixed the hazy uncertainty of
mythological speculation and abstract thought in the clear form and
living individuality of the personal mediator of redemption. It brought
this personality nearer to the hearts of the faithful than any other
figure of religious belief, and thereby procured for the Christian
cult-god Jesus, in his pure humanity, his overflowing goodness and
benevolence, such a predominance over his divine competitors, Mithras,
Attis, and others, that by the side of Jesus these faded away into
empty shadows. The Gnostic ideal man, that is, the Platonic idea, and
the moral ideal of man merged in him directly into a unity. The miracle
of the union of God and man, over which the ancient world had so hotly
and so fruitlessly disputed, seemed to have found its realisation in
Christ. Christ was the "Wise man" of the Stoic philosophy, in whom was
united for them all that is most honourable in man; more than this,
he was the God-man, as he had been preached and demanded by Seneca
for the moral elevation of mankind. [507] The world was consequently
so ready to receive and so well prepared for his fundamental ideas
that we easily see why the Church Christianity took its stand on the
human personality of its redeeming principle with almost more decision
than on the divine character of Jesus. Nevertheless, in spite of
the majesty and sublimity, in spite of the immeasurable significance
which the accentuation of the true humanity of Jesus has had for the
development of Christianity, it remains true that on the other hand it
is just this which is the source of all the insoluble contradictions,
of all the insurmountable difficulties from which the Christian view
of the world suffers. This is the reason why that great idea, which
Christianity brought to the consciousness of the men of the West,
and through which it conquered Judaism--the idea of the God-man--was
utterly destroyed, and the true content of this religion was obscured,
hidden, and misrepresented in such disastrous fashion, that to-day it
is no longer possible to assent to its doctrine of redemption without
the sacrifice of the intellect.







THE RELIGIOUS PROBLEM OF THE PRESENT


In the opinion of liberal theologians, not the God but rather the man
Jesus forms the valuable religious essence of Christianity. [508] In
saying this it says nothing less than that the whole of Christendom
up to the present day--that is, till the appearance of a Harnack,
Bousset, Wernle, and others of like mind--was in error about itself,
and did not recognise its own essence. For Christianity, as the
present account shows, from the very first conceived the God Jesus,
or rather the God-man, the Incarnate, the God-redeemer, suffering with
man and sacrificing himself for humanity, as the central point of
its doctrine. The declaration of the real manhood of Jesus appears,
on the other hand, but as an after-concession of this religion to
outer circumstances, wrung from it only later by its opponents,
and so expressly championed by it only because of its forming the
unavoidable condition of its permanence in history and of its practical
success. Only the God, therefore, not the man Jesus, can be termed the
"founder" of the Christian religion.

It is in fact the fundamental error of the liberal theology to think
that the development of the Christian Church took its rise from
an historical individual, from the man Jesus. The view is becoming
more common that the original Christian movement under the name of
Jesus would have remained an insignificant and transient movement
within Judaism but for Paul, who first gave it a religious view of
the world by his metaphysics of redemption, and who by his break
with the Jewish Law really founded the new religion. It will not
be long before the further concession is found necessary, that an
historical Jesus, as the Gospels portray him, and as he lives in the
minds of the liberal theologians of to-day, never existed at all;
so that he never founded the insignificant and diminutive community
of the Messiah at Jerusalem. It will be necessary to concede that the
Christ-faith arose quite independently of any historical personality
known to us; that indeed Jesus was in this sense a product of the
religious "social soul" and was made by Paul, with the required amount
of reinterpretation and reconstruction, the chief interest of those
communities founded by him. The "historical" Jesus is not earlier but
later than Paul; and as such he has always existed merely as an idea,
as a pious fiction in the minds of members of the community. The New
Testament with its four Gospels is not previous to the Church, but the
latter is antecedent to them; and the Gospels are the derivatives,
consequently forming a support for the propaganda of the Church,
and being without any claim to historical significance.

Nothing at all, as Kalthoff shows, is to be gained for the
understanding of Christianity from the completely modern view that
religion is an entirely personal life and experience. Religion
is such personal life only in an age which is differentiated into
personalities; it is such only in so far as this differentiation
has been accomplished. From the very beginning religion makes its
appearance as a phenomenon of social life; it is a group-religion,
a folk-religion, a State religion; and this social character is
naturally transferred to the free associations which are formed
within the limits of tribe and the State. The talk about personality
as the centre of all religious life is with regard to the origin of
Christianity absurd and unhistorical, for the reason that Christianity
grew up in religious associations, in communities. From this social
religion our personal religion has only been developed in a history
lasting centuries. Only after great struggles has personal religion
been able to succeed against an essentially older form. What devout
people of to-day call Christianity, a religion of the individual,
a principle of personal salvation, would have been an offence and an
absurdity to the whole of ancient Christendom. It would have been to
it the sin against the Holy Ghost which was never to be forgiven; for
the Holy Ghost was the spirit of the Church's unity, the connection
of the religious community, the spirit of the subordination of the
flock to the shepherd. For this reason individual religion existed
in old Christendom only through the medium of the association of the
community of the Church. A private setting up of one's own religion
was heresy, separation from the body of Christ. [509]

We cannot refuse to concede to the "Catholic" Church, both Roman and
Greek, that in this respect it has most faithfully preserved the spirit
of the earliest Christendom. This alone is to-day what Christianity in
essence once was--the religion of an association in the sense to which
we have referred. Thus Catholicism justly refers to "tradition" for
the truth of its religious view of the world and for the correctness
of its hierarchical claims. But Catholicism itself beyond doubt first
established this "tradition" in its own interests. It teaches also
an "historical" Jesus, but clearly one that is historical merely by
tradition, and of whose actual historical existence not the least
indication has yet been established. Protestantism, on the other hand,
is completely unhistoric in passing off the Gospels as the sources,
as the "revealed" basis of the faith in Christ, as if they had arisen
independently of the Church and represented the true beginnings of
Christianity. Consequently one cannot base one's religious faith on
the Gospel and wish nevertheless to stand outside of that community,
since the writings of the New Testament can only pass as the expression
of the community's life. One cannot therefore be Christian in the sense
of the original community without obliterating one's own personality
and uniting oneself as a member with the "Body of Christ"--that is,
with the Church. The spirit of obedience and humility, which Christ
demanded of his followers, is nothing but the spirit of subordination
to the system of rules of conduct observed by the society of worship
passing under his name. Christianity in the original sense is nothing
but--"Catholic" Christianity; and this is the faith of the Church
in the work of redemption accomplished by the God-man Christ in his
Church and by means of the organisation infused with his "spirit."

On purely religious grounds the wrongly so-called "Catholicism"
could very probably dispense with the fiction of an historical Jesus,
and go back to Paul's standpoint before the origin of the Gospels,
if it could have faith to-day in its mythological conception, of
the God sacrificing himself for mankind, without that fiction. In
its present form, however, it stands or falls as a Church with
the belief in the historical truth of the God-redeemer; because
all the Church's hierarchical claims and authority are based on
this authority having been entrusted to her by an historical Jesus
through the apostles. Catholicism relies for this, as it has been
said, on "tradition." But Catholicism itself called this tradition
into life, just as the priests at Jerusalem worked up the tradition
of an historical Moses in order to trace back to him their claim to
authority. It is the "Irony of World-History" that that very tradition
soon afterwards forced the Church, with regard to the historical
Christ, to conceal its real nature from the crowd, and to forbid the
laity to read the Gospels, on account of the contradiction between the
power of the Church and the traditional Christ it had produced. But
the position of Protestantism is even more contradictory and more
desperate than that of the Catholic Church, in view of our insight
into the fictitious character of the Gospels. For Protestantism has no
means but history for the foundation of its religious metaphysics;
and history, viewed impartially, leads away from those roots of
Christianity to which Protestantism strives, instead of towards them.

If this is true of Protestant orthodoxy it is even more true of that
form of Protestantism which thinks it can maintain Christianity
apart from its metaphysical doctrine of redemption because this
doctrine is "no longer suitable to the age." Liberal Protestantism
is and wishes to be nothing but a mere faith in the historical
personality of a man who is supposed to have been born 1,900 years
ago in Palestine, and through his exemplary life to have become the
founder of a new religion; being crucified and dying in conflict with
the authorities at Jerusalem, being raised up then as a God in the
minds of his enthusiastic disciples. It is a faith in the "loving
God the Father," because Jesus is supposed to have believed in him;
in the personal immortality of man, because this is supposed to have
been the presupposition of Jesus' appearance and doctrines; in the
"incomparable" value of moral instructions, because they stand in
a book which is supposed to have been produced under the immediate
influence of the prophet of Nazareth. Liberal Protestantism supports
morality on this, that Jesus was such a good man, and that for this
reason it is necessary for each individual man to follow the call
of Jesus. But it bases the faith in Jesus once and for all on the
historical significance of the Gospels; though it cannot conceal
from itself, after careful consideration, that the belief in their
historical value rests on extremely weak grounds, and that we know
nothing of that Jesus, not even that he ever lived. In any case we
know nothing which could be of influential religious significance,
and which could not be put together just as well or better from
other less doubtful sources. [510] It is pierced to the heart by the
denial of the historical personality of Jesus, not, like Catholicism,
merely as a Church, but in its very essence, as a Religion. And as to
its real religious kernel it consists in a few fine-sounding phrases
and some scattered references to a metaphysics which was once living,
but which is now degraded into a mere ornament for modest minds. And
after disposing of its would-be historical value there is left only
a dimly smouldering spark of "homeless sentiments," which would suit
any style of religious faith. Liberal Protestantism proclaims itself
as the really "modern" Christianity. Confronted by the philosophic
spirit of our day, it lays stress upon having no philosophy. It
sets aside all religious speculation as "Myth," if possible with
reference to Kant, as this is "modern," without noticing that it
is itself most deeply imbedded in mythology with its "historical"
Jesus. It believes that, in its exclusive reverence for the man Jesus,
it has brought Christianity to the "height of present culture." As to
this Stendel justly says: "Of the whole apologetic art with which the
modern Jesus-theology undertakes to save Christianity for our time,
it can be said that there is no historical religion which could not
just as well be brought into accord with the modern mind as that of
the New Testament." [511] We have no occasion to weep for the complete
collapse of such a "religion." This form of Christianity has already
been proved by Hartmann to be worthless from the religious point of
view; [512] and it is only a proof of the fascinating power of phrases,
of the laxity in our creeds, and the thoughtlessness of the mob in
religious matters, that it is even yet alive. For such reasons it
is even allowed, under the lead of the so-called critical theology,
to proclaim itself as the pure Christianity, now known for the first
time. Thus it finds sympathy. This unsystematic collection of thoughts,
arbitrarily selected from the view of the world and of life given
by the Gospels, which even so requires to be rhetorically puffed out
and artistically modified before it is made acceptable to the present
age,--this unspeculative doctrine of redemption, which at bottom is
uncertain of itself,--this sentimental, æsthetic, Jesus-worship of a
Harnack, Bousset, and the rest on whom W. v. Schnehen so pitilessly
broke his lance; [513] this whole so-called Christianity of cultured
pastors and a laity in need of redemption, would have long since
come to grief through its poverty of ideas, its sickening sweetness,
if it were not considered necessary to maintain Christianity at all
costs, were it even that of the complete deprivation of its spiritual
content. The recognition of the fact that the "historical" Jesus has
no religious interest at all, but at most concerns historians and
philologists, is indeed at present commencing to make its way into
wider circles. [514] If one only knew a way out of the difficulty! If
one were only not afraid of following a clear lead just because
one might then possibly be forced beyond the existing religion in
the course of his ideas--as the example of Kalthoff showed! If
only one had not such a fearful respect for the past and such a
tender "historic unconsciousness" and such immense respect for the
"historical basis" of existing religion! The reference to history and
the so-called "historical continuity of the religious development"
is indeed on the face of it merely a way out of a difficulty, and
another way of putting the fact that one is not desired to draw the
consequences of his presuppositions. As if there can still be talk of a
"historical basis" where there is no history, but pure myth! As if the
"preservation of historical continuity" could consist in maintaining
as history what are mythical fictions, just because they have
hitherto passed for historic truth, though we have seen through
their purely fictitious and unreal character! As if the difficulty
of the redemption of present-day civilisation from the chaos of
superstition, social deceit, cowardice, and intellectual servitude
which are connected with the name of Christianity, lay in a purely
spiritual sphere and not rather in the sentiment, in the slovenly
piety, in the heavy weight of ancient tradition, above all in the
economic, social, and practical relations which unite our churches
with the past! Faith in the future of Christianity is still built
not so much on the persuasive inner truth of its doctrine, but much
more on the inborn religious feeling of the members of the community,
on the religious education in school and home, and the consequent
increasing store of metaphysical and ethical ideas, on protection
by the State and--on the law of inertia in the spiritual life of the
mob. For the rest, in pulpit, in parish papers, and in public life,
a method of expression is used which is not essentially different
from that of orthodoxy, but is so adapted as to allow every man to
think what he deems best for himself. We are enthusiastically told
that thus we are able to keep the rudderless ship of Protestantism
still a while above water, and that we have "reconciled" faith with
modern culture in "the further development of Christianity."

Thus nineteen hundred years of religious development were completely
in error. Is no other course open to us but a complete break with the
Christian doctrine of redemption? This doctrine, however--such was
the result of our previous examination--is independent of the belief
in an historical Jesus. Its centre of gravity lies in the conception
of the "incarnation" of God, who suffers in the world but is finally
victorious over this suffering; and through union with whom Mankind
also "prevails over the world" and gains a new life in a higher
sphere of existence. That the form of this divine Redeemer of the
world coalesced, in the minds of the Christian community, with that
of a man Jesus; that, consequent on this, the act of redemption was
fixed as to time and place, is only the consequence of the conditions
under which the new religion appeared.

For this reason it can only claim, in and for itself, a transient
practical significance, and not a special religious value; while
on the other hand it has become the doom of Christianity that just
this making into history of the principle of redemption makes it
impossible for us still to acknowledge this religion. But then the
preservation of historical continuity or the "further development"
of Christianity in its proper sense probably does not consist in
separating this chance historical side of the Christian doctrine
of redemption from its connection with the whole Christian view of
the world and setting it up by itself, but only in going back to
the essential and fundamental idea of the Christian religion, and
stating its metaphysical doctrine of redemption in a manner more
nearly answering to the ideas of the day.

From the conception of a personal God-redeemer arose the possibility of
sacrificing a man in God's place, and of seeing the divine and ideal
man, that is, the Idea of Man, in an actual man. From the growing
Church's desire for authority, from its opposition to Gnostic phantasy
with its intellectual volatilising of the religious-moral kernel of
the Pauline doctrine of redemption, and from the wish not to give up
the historical connection with Judaism on opportunist grounds, arose
the necessity of portraying the divine-human expiatory sacrifice as
the sacrifice of an historical person who had arisen in Judaism. All
these different reasons, which led to the formation of the belief in
an "historical" Jesus, have no force with us, particularly after it
has been shown that the personality of the principle of redemption,
this fundamental presupposition of the evangelical "history," is in
the end to blame for all the contradictions and shortcomings of that
religion. To lead back to its real essence the Christian doctrine of
redemption can consequently mean nothing but placing the idea of the
God-man, as it lies at the basis of that doctrine, in the central
point of the religious view of the world, through the stripping off
of the mythical personality of the Logos.

God must become man, so that Man can become God and be redeemed from
the bounds of the finite. The idea of Man which is realised in the
world must itself be a divine idea, an idea of the Deity, and so
God must be the common root and essence of all individual men and
things; only then may Man attain his existence in God and freedom
from the world, through this consciousness of his supernatural divine
essence. Man's consciousness of himself and of his true essence must
itself be a divine consciousness. Man, and indeed every man, must be
a purely finite phenomenon, an individual limitation, the clothing
of the Deity with a human form. In possibility he is a God-man,
to be born again an actual God-man through his moral activity, and
consequently to become really one with God. In this conception all
the contradictions of Christian dogmatism are solved, and the kernel
of its doctrine of redemption is preserved without being divested of
its true significance by the introduction of mythical phantasy or of
historical coincidences, as is the case in Christianity.

If we are still to use the language of the past, and to call the divine
essence of mankind the immanent Godhead, "Christ," then any advance of
religion can only consist in the development and working out of this
"inner Christ," that is, of the spiritual-moral tendencies dwelling
in mankind, in the carrying of it back to its absolute and divine
basis, but not in the historical personification of this inner human
nature. Any reality of the God-man consequently consists in "Christ's"
activity in Man, in the proving of his "true self," of his personal,
spiritual essence, in the raising of one's self to personality on the
ground of Man's divine nature, but not in the magical efficacy of an
external divine personality. This, indeed, is nothing but the religious
ideal of mankind, which men have projected on to an historical figure,
in order to assure themselves of the "reality" of the ideal. It is not
true that it is "essential" to the religious consciousness to consider
its ideal in human form, and that for this reason the historical Jesus
is indispensable for the religious life. Were this true, religion
would not be, in principle, in a position to raise itself above the
mythical and primitive stage of God's externality and appearance to the
senses, and to conquer these Gods, working them more and more into the
forms of an inner nature. This, however, is the essence of religious
development. Religion would otherwise be confined to a lower province
in the human life of the spirit; and it would be overthrown whenever
the fiction of that projection and separation of God from one's own
self was seen through. It is only to orthodox Christianity that it
is necessary to represent the God in Man as a God outside of Man,
as the "unique" personality of a historical God-man; and that because
it still remains with one foot in religious naturalism and mythology,
and the historical circumstances of another age occasioned the choice
of that representation and falsification of the idea of the God-man.

To think of the world's activity as God's activity; of mankind's
development, filled with struggles and sufferings, as the story of a
divine struggle and Passion; of the world-process as the process of
a God, who in each individual creature fights, suffers, conquers and
dies, so that he may overcome the limitations of the finite in the
religious consciousness of man and anticipate his future triumph
over all the suffering of the world--that is the real Christian
doctrine of redemption. To revive in this sense the fundamental
conception from which Christianity sprang--and which is independent
of any historical reference--is, indeed, to return to this religious
starting-point. Protestantism, on the contrary, which repudiates Paul's
religion and sets up the Gospels as the foundation of its belief,
nevertheless does not go behind Christianity's development into the
Church, back to the origin of Christianity, but remains always within
this development, and deceives itself if it thinks that it can prevail
over the Church from the point of view of the Gospel. [515]

In such an interpretation and development of the Christian conception
of redemption "historical continuity" is preserved just as decidedly
as it is in the one-sided making into history of that thought on the
side of liberal Protestantism. What is in opposition to it is, on the
one hand, completely unhistorical belief in an historical Jesus; on
the other hand, the prejudice against the "immanent God," or against
Pantheism. But this prejudice is based entirely on that fiction of
an historical "mediator" and the hypothesis contained therein of a
dualistic separation of world and God. The representatives of the
monistic conception--who began to organise themselves a short time
ago--should be clearer as to the significance of that conception
than they are for the most part even at the present day. They must
perceive that the true doctrine of unity can only be the doctrine
of the all in one. There must be an idealistic monism in opposition
to the naturalistic monism of Haeckel, which is prevalent even
to-day. This monism must not exclude but include God's existence;
and its present unfruitful negation of all religion must deepen
into a positive and religiously valuable view of the world. Then,
and not till then, will it be able to effect a genuine separation
from the Church, and the monistic movement, still in its childhood,
may lead to an inner improvement and renovation of our spiritual
life in general. It requires much short-sightedness on the part of
the exponents of a purely historical Christianity to suppose that the
soulless and poor faith in the personal, or as it is considered better
expressed to-day, in the "living" God, in freedom and immortality,
supported by the authority of the "unique" personality of a man Jesus
who died two thousand years ago, will be in a position permanently
to satisfy religious needs, even when the metaphysic of redemption,
still connected with it at all points, and the pious attitude based
upon this are completely stripped off from it. The earlier the orthodox
Christians, by giving up their superstition in an historical Jesus,
and the Monists, by sacrificing their equally fatal superstition
in the sole reality of matter and in the redeeming truths of
physical science which alone can give happiness, come to a mutual
reconciliation, the better it will be for both. The more surely we
shall avoid the total obliteration of the religious consciousness;
and the civilised nations of Europe will be saved from the loss
of their spiritual ballast--towards which loss there seems at the
present day to be a continuous movement on all sides. At present
there are only two possibilities--either to look on quietly while
the tidal wave of naturalism, getting ever more powerful from day
to day, sweeps away the last vestige of religious thought, or to
transfer the sinking fire of religion to the ground of Pantheism,
in a religion independent of any ecclesiastical guardianship. The
time of dualistic Theism has gone by. At present all the advancing
spirits, in spheres most widely different, concur in striving towards
Monism. This striving is so deeply grounded and so well warranted,
that the Church will not be able to suppress it for ever. [516] The
chief obstacle to a monistic religion and attitude is the belief,
irreconcilable with reason or history, in the historical reality of a
"unique," ideal, and unsurpassable Redeemer.







NOTES


[1] Cf. also his "Kritik der Evangelien," 2 vols. (1850-51).

[2] "Kultur d. Gegenwart: Gesch. d. christl. Religion," 2nd ed.,
1909, 47.

[3] The same is true of Clemen, who, judging by his
"Religionsgeschichtl. Erklärung d. N.T." (1909), appears to be
acquainted with Robertson's masterpiece, "Christianity and Mythology,"
only from a would-be witty notice of Réville, and furthermore only
cites the author when he thinks he can demolish him with ease.

[4] A. Hausrath, in his work "Jesus u. die neutestamentlichen
Schriftsteller," vol. i. (1908), offers a striking example of how
light a matter our theologians make it to overthrow the attacks of
the opponents of an historical Jesus. In scarcely three pages at
the commencement of his compendious work he rejects the myth theory
of Bruno Bauer with the favourite appeal to a few individual and
historical features of the Gospel tradition which are intrinsically
of no significance, finishing up this "refutation" with a reckless
citation from Weinel which proves nothing for the historical character
of Jesus.

[5] Cf. also his work "Moses, Jesus, Paulus. Drei sagen varianten
des babylonischen Gottmenschen Gilgamesch," 2nd ed., 1909.

[6] Cf., for example, "Jesus Vier Vorträge, geh. in Frankf." 1910.

[7] In other respects the "progress" in the province of religious
history is not so great as I formerly believed I could assume. That
is to say, in essentials modern learning in this connection has
only brought facts to light and given a new focus to points of
view which were already possessed (cf. Dupuis and Volney) by the
eighteenth century. In the twenties and forties of the nineteenth
century investigations, unprejudiced and independent of theology,
had already reached in the case of some of their representatives,
such as Gfrörer, Lützelberger, Ghillany, Nork, and others, the point
which is to-day again represented by the most advanced learning. The
revolution of 1848 and the reaction consequent on it in ecclesiastical
matters then again shook, on account of their radical tendency, those
views which had been already arrived at. The liberal Protestantism,
too, that rose as a recoil against orthodoxy in its effort to work out
the "historical" Jesus as the kernel of Christianity on its part had
no interest in again bringing up the old results. Indeed, it actually
makes it a reproach to a person of the present day if he quotes the
works of those earlier investigators, and reminds him that religious
learning did not begin only with the modern Coryphaei, with Holtzmann,
Harnack, &c. Whoever looks upon things from this point of view can
most probably agree in the melancholy reflection of a reviewer of
the first edition of "The Christ Myth," when he says with reference
to the "latest investigations": "Apparently the whole learning of the
nineteenth century so far as relates to investigations into the moving
forces of civilisation and national upheavals will be considered by
future research as an arsenal of errors" (O. Hauser in the Neue Freie
Presse, August 8, 1909).

[8] It has also been reckoned as a want of "method" in this work
that I have often made use of a cautious and restrained mode of
expression, that I have spoken of mere "suppositions" and employed
locutions such as "it appears," &c., when it has been for the time
being impossible for science or myself to give complete certainty to
an assertion. This reproach sounds strange in the mouths of such as
plume themselves upon "scientific method." For I should think that it
was indeed more scientific in the given cases to express oneself in
the manner chosen by me, than by an unmeasured certainty in assertions
to puff out pure suppositions into undoubted facts. I must leave such
a mode of proceeding to the historical theologians. They work purely
with hypotheses. All their endeavours to obtain an historical kernel
from the Gospels rest upon conjectures simply. Above everything,
their explanation of the origin of Christianity simply from an
historical Jesus is, in spite of the certainty and self-confidence
with which it comes out, a pure hypothesis, and that of very doubtful
value. For that in reality the new religion should have been called
into life by the "all-subduing influence of the personality of
Jesus" and its accompaniments, the visions and hallucinations
of the disciples worked up into ecstasies, is so improbable, and
the whole view is psychologically so assailable, and, moreover,
so futile, that even a liberal theologian like Gunkel declares it
entirely insufficient ("Zum religionsgesichtl. Verständnis d. N.T.,"
89 sq.). With this explanation, however, stands or falls the whole
modern Jesus-religion. For if they cannot show how the Pauline and
Johannine Christology could develop from the mere existence of an
historical Jesus, if this now forms "the problem of problems of New
Testament research" (Gunkel, op. cit.), then their whole conception
of the rise of Christianity disappears into air, and they have no
right to hold up against others who seek a better explanation the
partially hypothetical character of the views advanced by them.

[9] Op. cit., 10 sq.

[10] Cf. K. Dunkmann, "Der historische Jesus, der mythologische
Christus, und Jesus der Christ" (1910). Cf. also Pfleiderer, "Das
Christusbild des urchristlichen Glaubens in religionsgeschichtlicher
Beleuchtung" (1903), 6 sq. Here, too, it is pointed out that modern
scientific theology in its description of the figure of Christ
proceeds in anything but an unprejudiced manner. Out of the belief in
Christ as contained in the New Testament it "only draws forth what
is acceptable to present modes of thinking--passing over everything
else and reading in much that is its own--in order to construct an
ideal Christ according to modern taste." Pfleiderer declares it a
"great illusion" to believe that the pictures of Christ in works
such as Harnack's "Wesen des Christentums," each differently drawn
according to the peculiarities of their composers, but all more or
less in the modern style, are the result of scientific historical
research, and are related to the old conceptions of Christ like truth
to error. "One should," he says, "be reasonable and honourable enough
to confess that both the modern and the antique conceptions of Christ
are alike creations of the common religious spirit of their times and
sprung from the natural need of faith to fix its special principle in
a typical figure and to illustrate it. The differences between the
two correspond to the differences of the times, the former a simple
mythical Epic, the latter a sentimental and conscious Romance." In
the same sense Alb. Schweitzer also characterises the famous "method"
of historical theology as "a continual experimentation according to
settled hypotheses in which the leading thought rests in the last
resort upon an intuition" ("Von Reimarus bis Wrede," 1906). Indeed,
Weinel himself, who cannot hold up against the author with sufficient
scorn his lack of method and his dilettantism has to confess that
the same blemishes which in his opinion characterise dilettantism are
to be found even in the most prominent representatives of historical
theology, in a Wrede or a Wellhausen. He reproaches both of these with
the fact that in their researches "serious faults of a general nature
and in method" are present (21). He advises the greatest prudence
in respect to Wellhausen's Gospel Commentaries "on account of their
serious general blemishes" (26). He objects to Wrede that to be
consistent he must himself go over to radical dilettantism (22). He
charges Schweitzer actually with dilettantism and blind bias which
cause every literary consideration to be lacking (25 sq.). Indeed,
he finds himself, in face of the "dilettante endeavours" to deny the
historical Jesus, compelled even to admit that liberal theology for
the future "must learn to express itself with more caution and to
exhibit more surely the method of religious historical comparison"
(14). He blames Gunkel for imprudence in declaring Christianity to be
a syncretic religion, and demands that the historical works of liberal
theology "should be clearer in their results and more convincing in
their methods" (16). He says that the method which they employ is
at present not sure and clear enough since "it has been spoken of
generally in very loose if not misleading terms," and he confesses:
"We have apparently not made the measure, according to which we
decide upon what is authentic and what not so in the tradition,
so plain that it can always be recognised with security" (29). Now,
if matters are in such a position, we non-theologians need not take
too tragically the reproach of dilettantism and lack of scientific
method, since it appears very much as though historical theology,
with the exception at most of Herr Weinel, has no sure method.

[11] Cf. W. v. Schnehen, "Der moderne Jesuskultus," 2nd ed., 1907,
p. 41, a work with which even a Pfleiderer has agreed in the main
points; also the same author's "Fr. Naumann vor dem Bankrott des
Christentums," 1907.

[12] The excursus on "The Legend of Peter" which was contained in
the first edition of this work, and there appears to have been rather
misunderstood, has recently (1910) appeared more closely worked out
and reasoned in an independent form in the Neuer Frankfurter Verlag
under the title "Die Petrus Legende. Ein Beitrag zur Mythologie des
Christentums."

[13] Op cit., 82.

[14] Ep. ad Luc. 41.

[15] E. v. Mommsen and Wilamowitz in the Transactions of the
German Archæological Institute, xxiii. Part iii.; "Christl. Welt,"
1899, No. 57. Compare as a specially characteristic expression of
that period's longing for redemption the famous Fourth Eclogue of
Virgil. Also Jeremias, "Babylonisches im Neuen Testament," 1905,
pp. 57 sqq. Lietzmann, "Der Weltheiland," 1909.

[16] It is certain that the old Israelite Jahwe only attained that
spiritualised character for which he is nowadays extolled under the
influence of the Persians' imageless worship of God. All efforts to
construct, in spite of this admission, a "qualitative" difference
between Jahwe and Ahuramazda, as, for example, Stave does in his work
("Der Einfluss des Parsismus auf das Judentum," 1898, 122 sq.) are
unavailing. According to Stave, the conception of good and evil is
not grasped in Mazdeism in all its purity and truth, but "has been
confused with the natural." But is that distinction "grasped in all
its purity" in Judaism with its ritualistic legality? Indeed, has it
come to a really pure realisation even in Christianity, in which piety
and attachment to the Church so often pass as identical ideas? Let
us give to each religion its due, and cease to be subtle in drawing
such artificial distinctions in favour of our own--distinctions which
fall into nothingness before every unprejudiced consideration.

[17] Exod. iv. 22; Deut. xxxii. 6; Hosea xi. 1.

[18] Isa. xlix. 6, 8.

[19] Id. li. 16.

[20] Isa. xliv. 28, xlv. 1 sq.

[21] Cumont, "Textes et monuments figurés relatifs aux mystères de
Mithra," 1899, vol. i. 188.

[22] Isa. xi. 65, 17 sqq.

[23] Isa. ix. 6; Micah v. 1.

[24] Psa. xlvii. 6, 9, lvii. 12.

[25] Ch. xlv.-li.

[26] Ch. vi. 1 sqq.

[27] Cf. Gunkel, "Zum religionsgesch. Verständnis des Neuen
Testaments," 1903, p. 23, note 4.

[28] Revelation xxii.; cf. Pfleiderer, "Das Urchristentum. Seine
Schriften und seine Lehren," 2nd edit., 1902, vol. ii. 54 sqq.

[29] Dan. xii. 3.

[30] The assertion advanced by Grätz and Lucius that the work mentioned
is a forgery of a fourth-century Christian foisted upon Philo with
the object of recommending the Christian "Ascesis," and that a sect
of Therapeutes never existed, can now be considered disposed of,
since its refutation by Massebiau and Conybeare. Cf. Pfleiderer,
"Urchristentum," ii. 5 sq.

[31] Cf. as regards the Essenes, Schürer, "Geschichte des jüdischen
Volkes im Zeitalter Jesu Christi," 1898, II. 573-584.

[32] Regarding the connection between the Essenes and the Apocalypse,
cf. Hilgenfeld, "Die jüdische Apokalyptik," 1857, p. 253 sqq.

[33] On this point, cf. Brandt, "Die mandäische Religion," 1899;
"Realenzyklop, f.d. protest. Theologie u. Kirche," xii. 160 sqq.;
Gunkel, op. cit., 18 sqq.

[34] Cf. Hilgenfeld, "Ketzergeschichte des Urchristentums," 1884.

[35] Gunkel, op. cit., 29.

[36] Gen. xxxii. 24.

[37] Numb. xx. 16; Exod. xiii. 21.

[38] Exod. xxxiii. 14; 2 Sam. v. 23.

[39] 1 Kings i. 3; Ezek. xliii. 5.

[40] Isa. lxiii. 9 sqq.

[41] Psa. ii.

[42] Cf. Ghillany, "Die Menschenopfer der alten Hebräer," 1842,
326-334; Eisenmenger, "Entdecktes Judentum," 1711, i. 311, 395
sqq. Also Movers, "Die Phönizier," 1841; i. 398 sq.

[43] Exod. xxiii. 20 sqq.

[44] Jos. xxiv. 11.

[45] Jos. v. 2-10. The unhistorical nature of Joshua is admitted also
by Stade. Stade counts him an Ephraimitic myth, recalling to mind in
so doing that the Samaritans possessed an apocryphal book of the same
name in place of our Book of Joshua ("Gesch. d. Volkes Israel," 1887,
i. 64 sqq., 135). The Samaritan Book of Joshua (Chronicum Samaritanum,
published 1848) was written in Arabic during the thirteenth century in
Egypt, and is based upon an old work composed in the third century
B.C. containing stories which in part do not appear in our Book
of Joshua.

[46] That the hypothesis of Smith here mentioned is quite admissible
from the linguistic point of view has lately been maintained by
Schmiedel in opposition to Weinel (Protestantenbl., 1910, No. 17, 438).

[47] Epiph., "Hæresiol." xxix.

[48] Smith, op. cit., 37 sq., 54.

[49] Isa. ii. 1. Cf. Epiphanius, op. cit.

[50] Id. xxix. 6.

[51] "Enc. Bibl.," art. "Nazareth."

[52] "Since ha-nosrîm was a very usual term for guardians or
protectors, it follows that when the term or its Greek equivalent
hoi Nazoraioi was used the adoption of its well-known meaning was
unavoidable. Even if the name was really derived from the village
of Nazareth, no one would have thought of it. Every one would have
unavoidably struck at once upon the current meaning. If a class of
persons was called protectors, every one would understand that as
meaning that they protected something. No one would hit upon it to
derive their name from an otherwise unknown village named Protection"
(Smith, op. cit., 47).

[53] Cf. in this connection Smith, op. cit., 36 sq., 42 sqq.

[54] Cf. Cumont, op. cit., 195 sq.

[55] Matt. ii. 25.

[56] Zech. iii. 10.

[57] Jeremias, op. cit., 56; cf. also 33 and 46, notes.

[58] Robertson, "A Short History of Christianity," 1902, 9 sqq.

[59] Gunkel, op. cit., 34.

[60] Id., op. cit., 39-63; cf. also Robertson, "Pagan Christs," 1903,
155 seq.

[61] Cf. Robertson, op. cit., 156.

[62] Mark v. 27; Luke xxiv. 19; Acts xviii. 25, xxviii. 31.

[63] Luke ix. 49, x. 17; Acts iii. 16; James v. 14 sq. For more
details regarding Name magic, see W. Heitmüller, "Im Namen Jesu," 1903.

[64] Cf. on whole subject Robertson, op. cit., 153-160.

[65] Ch. vii. 29.

[66] Isa. iii.

[67] Ch. xii. 10 sqq.; cf. Movers, op. cit., i. 196.

[68] Ch. viii. 14.

[69] Op. cit., 78.

[70] Frazer, "The Golden Bough," 1900, ii. 196 sq.

[71] Frazer, "Adonis, Attis, Osiris," 1908, 128 sqq.

[72] "The Golden Bough," i., iii. 20 sq.

[73] Verse 14.

[74] Op. cit., viii. 24-29.

[75] 1 Gen. xv. 17.

[76] Ghillany, op. cit., 148, 195, 279, 299, 318 sqq. Cf. especially
the chapter "Der alte hebräische Nationalgott Jahve," 264 sqq.

[77] J. M. Robertson, "Pagan Christs," 140-148. It cannot be
sufficiently insisted upon that it was only under Persian influence
that Jahwe was separated from the Gods of the other Semitic races,
from Baal, Melkart, Moloch, Chemosh, &c., with whom hitherto he had
been almost completely identified; also that it was only through
being worked upon by Hellenistic civilisation that he became that
"unique" God, of whom we usually think on hearing the name. The idea
of a special religious position of the Jewish people, the expression
of which was Jahwe, above all belongs to those myths of religious
history which one repeats to another without thought, but which
science should finally put out of the way.

[78] "Golden Bough," iii. 138-146.

[79] Movers, op. cit., 480 sqq.

[80] VI. 47 sqq., 209 sqq.

[81] Cf. Gunkel, "Schöpfung und Chaos in Urzeit und Endzeit," 1895. 309
sq. E. Schrader, "Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament," 1902,
514-520.

[82] Ch. viii. 15. Cf. also vi. 8, 9.

[83] "Abhandlungen d. Kgl. Ges. d. Wissenschaften zu Göttingen," xxxiv.

[84] Cf. also P. Wendland, "Ztschr. Hermes," xxxiii., 1898, 175 sqq.,
and Robertson, op. cit., 138, note 1.

[85] In the same way the Phrygian Attis, whose name characterises him
as himself the "father," was also honoured as the "son," beloved and
spouse of Cybele, the mother Goddess. He thus varied between a Father
God, the high King of Heaven, and the divine Son of that God.

[86] Frazer, op. cit., iii. 138-200. Cf. also Robertson, "Pagan
Christs," 136-140.

[87] Keim, "Geschichte Jesu," 1873, 331 note.

[88] Ghillany, op. cit., 510 sqq.

[89] Id. 505.

[90] 2 Sam. xxi. 9; cf. Lev. xxiii. 10-14.

[91] "Hist.," xviii. 7.

[92] 2 Kings iii. 27.

[93] "Hist. Nat.," xxxiv. 4, § 26.

[94] Mentioned in Eusebius, "Praeparatio Evangelica,"
i. 10. Cf. Movers, op. cit., 303 sq.

[95] "Der Mythus bei den Hebräern," 1876, 109-113.

[96] Cf. Ghillany, op. cit., 451 sqq.; Daumer, op. cit., 34 sqq., 111.

[97] Numb. xx. 22 sqq., xxvii. 12 sqq., xxxiii. 37 sqq.,
Deut. xxxii. 48 sqq. Cf. Ghillany, op. cit., 709-721.

[98] Deut. xviii. 15.

[99] Cf. Heb. v.

[100] Diodorus Siculus, ii. 44.

[101] Justin, "Dial. cum Tryphone," cap. xc.

[102] Schürer, op. cit., ii. 555. Cf. also Wünsche, "Die Leiden des
Messias," 1870.

[103] See above, page 40 sqq.

[104] Cf. Eisenmenger, op. cit., ii. 720 sqq.; Gfrörer, "Das
Jahrhundert des Heils," 1838, ii. 260 sqq.; Lützelberger, "Die
kirchl. Tradition über den Apostel Johannes u. s. Schriften,"
1840, 224-229; Dalman, "Der leidende und der sterbende Messias der
Synagoge im ersten nachchristlichen Jahrtausend," 1888; Bousset,
"Die Religion des Judentums, im neutestamentlichen Zeitalter," 1903,
218 sq.; Jeremias, op. cit., 40 sq.

[105] Op. cit., 21.

[106] Op. cit., 71 sq.

[107] Kautzsch, "Pseudoepigraphen," 500.

[108] Winckler, op. cit., 67-77. Cf. also Jeremias, op. cit., 40,
and his "Das Alte Testament im Lichte des alten Orients," 1904, 239 sq.

[109] Gen. xl.

[110] Luke xxiii. 39-43; cf. also Isa. lxxx. 12.

[111] Jos. v. 2 sqq.

[112] Amos viii. 10; cf. Movers, op. cit., 243.

[113] Cf. Robertson, "Pagan Christs," 157.

[114] Numb. xiv.

[115] Id. xiii. 9; Gen. xlviii. 16.

[116] Id. xiii. 7; Gen. xlix. 9.

[117] 1 Chron. iv. 11.

[118] Judges ii. 9.

[119] Id. iv.

[120] Cf. Nork, "Realwörterbuch," 1843-5, ii. 301 sq.

[121] Cf. on whole subject Martin Brückner, "Der sterbende und
auferstehende Gottheiland in den orientalischen Religionen und ihr
Verhältnis zum Christentum. Religionsgesch. Volksbücher," 1908.

[122] Ch. ii. 12-20.

[123] Ch. iii. 1-8.

[124] Ch. v. 3-5.

[125] Ch. xii.

[126] "Zum religionsgesch. Verst. d. N.T.," 54.

[127] "L'origine de tous les cultes," 1795, v. 133.

[128] "Abraxas," 117.

[129] Cf. regarding the mythical nature of Moses, who is to be looked
upon as an offshoot of Jahwe and Tammuz, Winckler, op. cit., 86-95.

[130] Cf. also O. Pfleiderer, "Das Christusbild des urchristlichen
Glaubens in religionsgesch. Beleuchtung," 1903, 37. Also Jeremias,
"Das A.T. im Lichte des alten Orients," 254.

[131] I. 107.

[132] Cf. Plutarch, "Artaxerxes," ch. i.

[133] Movers, op. cit., 228.

[134] II. 9, 2.

[135] Bousset, "Das Judentum," 220.

[136] 1 Kings xi. 14 sq.

[137] Schrader, "Die Keilinschriften u. d. A.T.," 225.

[138] Winckler, op. cit., 172 sqq., Jeremias, "Das A.T. im Lichte
d. a. O.," 2nd. ed., 488 sqq.; cf. also Baentsch, "David und sein
Zeitalter. Wissenschaft u. Bildung," 1907.

[139] Ep. viii. 3.

[140] Id. xlii. 58.

[141] Ch. v. 1.

[142] Gen. xxxv. 11-19; Deut. xxxiii. 12; Gen. xliv. 26.

[143] Cf. Nork, "Realwörterbuch," i. 240 sq.

[144] The other famous "prophecy" supposed to refer to the birth of the
Messiah, viz., Isaiah vii. 14, is at present no longer regarded as such
by many. The passage obviously does not refer to the Messiah. This
is shown by a glance at the text, and it would hardly have been
considered so long as bearing that meaning, if any one had taken the
trouble to read it in its context. Consider the situation. Queen Rezin
of Syria and Pekah of Israel march against the Jewish King Ahaz, who
is therefore much troubled. At the command of Jahwe the prophet goes
to the king in order to exhort him to courage, and urges him to pray
for a sign of the happy outcome of the fight. He, however, refuses
to tempt God. Thereupon Isaiah himself gives him a sign. "Behold,"
he says, "a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and shall call his
name Immanuel, God be with us. Before the child shall know to refuse
the evil and choose the good, the land whose two kings thou abhorrest
shall be forsaken." And undisturbed by the fact that this prophecy
for the moment can give but little encouragement to the king, Isaiah
goes with the help of two witnesses(!) to a prophetess and gets her
with child in order to make his words true(!). The text does not say
in what relationship the woman stood to Isaiah. The Hebrew word Almah
may mean "young woman" as well as "virgin." The Septuagint, however,
thoughtlessly making the passage refer to the Messiah, and having
before its eyes very possibly the stories of the miraculous birth of
the heathen Redeemer Gods, translates the word straightway by "virgin,"
without thinking what possible light it thereby threw upon Isaiah.

[145] Ch. lx. 1 sqq.

[146] Psa. lxviii. 32 sq.

[147] Dupuis, op. cit., 268.

[148] Matt. i. 14 sq.

[149] The feasts of the Gods in question also correspond to this
in character. They fell upon the solstice (the birthday or day
of death of the sun), so far as their connection with the sun was
emphasized. On the contrary, upon the equinoxes, so far as their
connection with vegetation was concerned, sowing and harvest were
brought into prominence. Usually, however, death and reappearance were
joined in one single feast, and this was celebrated at the time in
spring when day and night were of equal length, when vegetation was
at its highest, and in the East the harvest was begun. Cf. Jeremias,
"Babylonisches im N.T.," 10 sq.

[150] One should compare the description given by Hommel of the
climate of Babylonia (op. cit., 186) with the picture of the natural
occurrences which, according to Gunkel, gave occasion for the myth
of the birth of Marduk, and the threatening of the child by the
"Winter Dragon," Tiâmat. "Before spring descends to the earth from
heaven, winter has had its grim (!) rule upon the earth. Men pine away
(in the country of the two rivers!) beneath its sway, and look up to
heaven wondering if deliverance will not come. The myth consoles them
with the story that the God of spring who will overthrow winter has
already been born. The God of winter who knows for what he is destined
is his enemy, and would be very pleased if he could devour him. And
winter at present ruling is much stronger than the weak child. But his
endeavour to get rid of his enemy comes to nought. Do you then want to
know why he is so grim? He knows that he has only a short time. His
might is already broken although we may be yet unaware of it. The
year has already changed to spring. The child grows up in heaven; the
days become longer, the light of the sun stronger. As soon as he is
grown up he descends and overthrows his old enemy. 'Only trust in God
without despair, spring must come'" ("Schöpfung und Chaos," 389 sq.).

[151] Dupuis has already pointed this out, op. cit., 152.

[152] Macrobius, "Saturnal.," i. 18, i. 34-35.

[153] "Adversus Nationes," v. 6 and 13.

[154] Cf. Simrock, "Handbuch der deutschen Mythologie," 4th ed.,
1874, 201 and 225.

[155] Op. cit., 138. The transfixing of the victim with the holy lance,
as we meet it in John xix. 34, appears to be a very old sacrificial
custom, which is found among the most different races. For example,
both among the Scythian tribes in Albania in the worship of Astarte
(Strabo) and in Salamis, on the island of Cyprus, in that of Moloch
(Eusebius, "Praep. Evang.," iv. 16). "The lance thrust," says Ghillany,
with reference to the Saviour's death, "was not given with the object
of testing whether the sufferer was still alive, but was in order to
correspond with the old method of sacrificing. The legs were not broken
because the victim could not be mutilated. In the evening the corpse
had to be taken down, just as Joshua only allowed the kings sacrificed
to the sun to remain until evening upon the cross" (op. cit., 558).

[156] Frazer, op. cit., 345 sq. F. Kauffmann, "Balder Mythus u. Sage
nach ihren dichterischen u. religiösen Elementen untersucht," 1902,
266 sq.

[157] Rigv. v. 1, v. 2, iii. 1, vii. 12, i. 96, &c.

[158] Hillebrand, "Vedische Mythologie," 1891-1902, ii. 38 sq.

[159] According to early Christian writers, such as Justin and Origen,
Jesus also came into the world in a cave, and Jerome complains
(Epist. lviii.) that in his time the heathens celebrated the feast
of the birth of Tammuz at Bethlehem in the same cave in which Jesus
was born.

[160] I. 72, 2; v. 11, 6; v. 2, 1; iii. 1, 14; i. 65, 1; x. 46, 2.

[161] III. 1, 7; iii. 9, 7; v. 1, 1; v. 2, 1, and 2; iii. 7, 2; x. 4,
2, and 3.

[162] Cf. Volney, "Die Ruinen," 1791 (Reclam), note 83 to
chap. xiii. This is the reason why the infant Christ was represented
in early Christian pictures lying in his mother's lap or in a cradle
between an Ox and an Ass.

[163] Jeremias, "Babylonisches im Neuen Testament," 35, note
1. Cf. Dupuis, op. cit., 111 sqq.

[164] Dupuis, op. cit., 143 sq.

[165] Cf. also Winckler, "Die babylonische Geisteskultur Wissenschaft
u. Bildung," 1907. Jeremias, "Babylonisches im N.T.," 62 sqq. The
astral references of the Christ myth are very beautifully shown in
the "Thomakapelle" at Karlsruhe, where the Master has depicted in
costly profusion and unconscious insight the chief points of the
Gospel "history" in connection with the signs of the Zodiac and the
stars--the riddle of the Christ story and its solution! As is well
known, the theological faculty in Heidelburg conferred an "honorary
doctorate of theology" upon the Master.

[166] "Le Lalita Vistara, traduit du sanscrit en français," i. 76 sqq.

[167] Further in R. Seydel, "Die Buddhalegende u. das Leben Jesu," 2nd
ed., 1897, and in his "Das Evangelium von Jesus in seinem Verhältnis
zur Buddhasage u. Buddhalegende," 1882. Also Van den Bergh van Eysinga,
"Indische Einflüsse auf evang. Erzählungen," 2nd ed., 1909. Cf. also
O. Pfleiderer, "Das Christusbild," 23 sqq.

[168] "Urchristentum," i. 411 sq.

[169] Robertson, "Christianity and Mythology," 1900, 129-302.

[170] Op. cit., 25 sqq., 239-244; cf., on the other hand, Paul
W. Schmidt, "Die Geschichte Jesu erläutert," 1904, 16.

[171] Cf. also Seydel, "Evangelium von Jesus," 305 sqq.;
"Buddha-Legende," 46 sqq. Also Émile Burnouf, "La Science des
Religions," 4th ed., 1885, 105.

[172] R. Kessler, "Realenz. f. prot. Theol. u. Kirche," xii. 163.

[173] Foucaux, "Le Lalita Vistara," i. 40.

[174] Hippolytus, op. cit., 9, 10; Epiphanius, op. cit., 30, 53.

[175] Cf. Pfleiderer, "Christusbild," 14 sq.

[176] Cf. also Max Müller, "Natural Religion"; Bergaigne, "La religion
védique d'après les hymnes du Rigveda," 1878-83; Holtzmann, "Agni
nach den Vorstellungen des Mahâbhârata," 1878.

[177] Rgv. iii. 1, 9, 10.

[178] Id. ii. 23; i. 7; xcv. 2, 5; x. 2, 7; viii. 29, 3.

[179] Id. iii. 5, 10; i. 148, 1. Cf. also Adalb. Kuhn, "Die Herabkunft
des Feuers und des Göttertrankes," 2nd ed., 1886-9. In Mazdeism also
the light is indissolubly connected with the air, passing as this
does as its bearer. Cf. F. Cumont, "Textes et monuments," i. 228,
ii. 87 sq., and his "Mystères de Mithra."

[180] Il., xi. 20; cf. Movers, op. cit., 242 sq.

[181] Cf. John x. 3, 7, 9.

[182] O. Gruppe, "Griech. Mythologie," 1900, ii. 1328, note 10.

[183] Id., op. cit., 1307. According to the Arabian legend Father
Abraham, also, who here plays the part of a saviour and redeemer,
was under the name of Thare, a skilful master workman, understanding
how to cut arrows from any wood, and being specially occupied with
the preparation of idols (Sepp, "Das Heidentum und dessen Bedeutung
für das Christentum," 1853, iii. 82).

[184] "Praep. Evang.," ix. 27.

[185] 2 Cor. viii. 9.

[186] Gruppe, op. cit., 1322, 1331.

[187] Preller, "Griech. Mythol.," 1894, 775 sq., 855.

[188] Robertson, "Christianity and Mythology," 322.

[189] Matt. iii. 17; Mark i. 11; Luke iii. 22.

[190] Phereda or Pheredet, the dove, is the Chaldaic root of the name
Aphrodite, as the Goddess in the car drawn by two doves was called
among the Greeks. In the whole of Nearer Asia the cult of doves was
connected with that of the Mother Goddess. As is well known, the dove
as a symbol of innocence or purity is also the bird of the Virgin
Mary, who is often compared to one. Indeed, in the Protevangelium
of James she is actually called a dove which nested in the temple, a
plain reference to the dove cult of the Syrian Aphrodite or Atargatis
(Astarte, Astaroth).

[191] Irenæus, i. 28.

[192] Hippolytus iv. 35. This brings to mind that, according to
Persian ideas also, besides the Trinity of Heaven (Ahuramazda), Sun,
Fire (Mithras), and Air (Spirit, "word," Honover, Spenta Armaiti),
the earth stood as a fourth principle (Anahita, Anaitis, Tanit). This
stood in the same relation to Mithras as Istar to Tammuz, Cybele to
Attis, Atargatis to Adonis, Maya to Agni, Aphrodite to Hermes, Mary
to Jesus, &c., becoming identical, however, usually with the "word"
of God, the holy spirit (Cumont, op. cit., ii. 87 sq.).

[193] "Dialog.," 88.

[194] One cannot therefore say, as is usual, that Mark, in whom the
story of the birth given in Matthew and Luke is not found, knew nothing
of a supernatural birth of Christ. For the narrative of the baptism
is the history of his birth, while the corresponding narrative of the
other Evangelists only came into existence later, when the original
sense of the story of the baptism in Mark was no longer understood.

[195] Quoted in Usener, "Religionsgesch. Untersuchungen," 1889, i. 64.

[196] Thus Mithras also was said to have been born on the bank of a
river, just as Jesus received baptism in or near the Jordan. On this
account "the Rock-born" was usually represented with a torch in his
left and a sword or knife in his right hand (Cumont, "Myst. d. Mithra,"
97). This recalls to mind the words of Jesus in Matt. x. 34: "I came
not to send peace, but a sword."

[197] Cf. Wobbermin, "Religionsgesch. Studien zur Frage der
Beeinflussung des Urchristentums durch das antike Mysterienwesen,"
1896, 154 sqq. The Christian Church also surrounded the act of baptism
with an unusual splendour of lights and candles. Not only was the
House of God lit up on this occasion in a festive manner, but each
individual to be baptized had to carry a burning candle. The sermons
which have come down to us delivered on the feast of the Epiphany,
the feast of the birth and baptism of the Saviour which in earlier
days fell together(!), excel in the description of the splendour of
the lights; indeed, the day of the feast itself was actually called
"the day of lights" or "the lights" (phota).

[198] Rgv. x. 88, 2.

[199] Id. v. 2, 9.

[200] "Antiq.," xviii. 5, 2.

[201] "Contra Celsum," i. 47.

[202] Graetz calls it "a shameless interpolation" ("Gesch. d. Juden,"
1888, iii. 278). Cf. J. Chr. K. v. Hofmann, "Die heiligen Schriften
des N.T.," vii. Tl. 3, 1876, 4; Schürer, "Gesch. den jüdischen Volkes
im Zeitalter Jesu," i. 438, note.

[203] Cf. Sepp., op. cit., i. 168 sqq.

[204] Cf. Usener, op. cit., 62.

[205] I. 8, 9, 10, 16; cf. Matt. iv. 16.

[206] Luke i. 5 sqq.

[207] Gen. xvii. 16 sqq.

[208] Judges, xiii. 2 sqq.

[209] John v. 35.

[210] Id. iii. 30.

[211] Luke i. 26.

[212] Matt. iii. 4.

[213] 2 Kings i. 8.

[214] Matt. xi. 14.

[215] Cf. Nork, "Realwörterbuch," i. 451 sqq. The Baptist John in
the Gospels also appears as the "forerunner," announcer, herald, and
preparer of the way for Jesus, and it appears that the position of
Aaron in regard to Moses, he being given the latter as a mouthpiece
or herald, has helped in the invention of the Baptist's figure. A
similar position is taken in the Old Testament by the "Angel of the
Countenance," the messenger, mediator, ambassador, and "Beginning
of the way of God," the rabbinic Metatron, whom we saw earlier was
identical with Joshua (see above, p. 56 sq.). In the Syro-Phoenician
and the Greek Mysteries Cadmus, Kadmilos, or Kadmiel, a form of the
divine messenger and mediator Hermes, also called Iasios (Joshua),
corresponded to him, his name literally meaning "he who goes before
God" or prophesies of him, the announcer, herald, or forerunner
of the coming God (cf. Schelling, "Die Gottheiten von Samothrake
Ww.," i. 8, 358, 392 sqq.). Ezra ii. 40, 39, and Nehem. vii. 43,
call Kadmiel a Levite, he being always named together with the High
Priest Joshua. It is probably only another name of the latter himself,
and characterises him as servant and herald of God. Now Kadmiel is the
discoverer of writing and the establisher of civilisation, and in so
far identical with Oannes, the Babylonian "Water-man" and Baptism-God
(Movers, op. cit., 518 sqq.). Can Oannes (Johannes) the Baptist in
this way have become Kadmiel, the "forerunner" and preparer of the
way of Jesus, who announced his near arrival, and the God Jesus, in
consequence of this, have divided into two different figures, that
of Joshua-Kadmiel (Johannes) and the Messiah Jesus? In this regard
it is certainly not without significance that the figure of the High
Priest Joshua in Zechariah wavers between the Messiah (Zemah) and a
mere forerunner of the latter. John's question to Jesus, "Art thou
he that cometh, or look we for another?" (Matt. xi. 3) is exactly the
question which strikes the reader in reading the corresponding passage
of Zechariah. Possibly the presence of the dove at the baptism in the
Jordan obtains in this way a still closer explanation, for Semiramis,
the Dove Goddess, is the spouse of Oannes (Ninus); John and the dove
accordingly are the parents, who are present at the "birth" of the
divine son. But the violent death of John at Herod's command and
the head of the prophet upon the dish have prototypes in the myth of
Cadmus. For the head of the latter is supposed to have been cut off by
his brother and to have been buried upon a brazen shield, a cult story
which plays a part especially in the Mysteries of the Cabiri Gods,
to whom Cadmus belongs (cf. Creuzer, "Symbolik und Mythologie der
alten Völker," 1820, ii. 333). According to Josephus (op. cit.) John
was put to death because Herod feared political disorders from his
appearance, while Matthew makes him fall a victim to Herod's revenge,
the latter having been censured by John for his criminal marriage with
the wife of his brother. Moreover, the prophet Elijah, who accuses Ahab
of having yielded to his wife Jezebel and of having murdered Naboth
(1 Kings xxi.), as well as the prophet Nathan, who reproaches David
for having killed Uriah and having married his wife (2 Sam. xii.,
cf. also Esther v. 7, 2), are also prototypes. According to this
a religious movement or sect must, in the minds of posterity, have
been condensed into the figure of John the Baptist. Its followers,
who closely resembled the Essenes, in view of the imminent nearness
of the kingdom of heaven, exhorted men to a conversion of mind,
looked upon the Messiah in the sense of Daniel essentially as the
God appointed ("awakened") judge over the living and the dead,
and sought by baptism to apply to the penitents the magic effects
which should flow from the name of their Cult God Johannes (Oannes),
the Babylonian-Mandaic Baptism and Water-God. The stern and gloomy
character of this sect may have been reflected in the character sketch
of the John in the Gospels, and between it and the sect of Jesus many
collisions, disagreements, and conversions appear to have taken place
(Matt. xi. 1 sq.; Luke vii. 18 sqq.; John i. 37). Possibly the sect
of Jesus was originally only an excrescence from, and a development
of, the conception which the disciples of John had of the Messiah,
as is indicated by the supposed blood relationship between Jesus and
John. At any rate, the adherents of the former in their belief in the
sufferings, death, and resurrection of the Messiah felt that their
point of view was higher and more perfect as compared with that of
John's disciples, who do not appear to have risen essentially above
the general ideas of the Jewish Apocalyptics. According to Matthew
iii. 13 Jesus came out of Galilee, the "Galilee of the Heathens," to
the baptism of John. Herein the original heathenish origin of the faith
of Jesus was pointed to. "The people which sat in darkness have seen
a great light. To them which sat in the region and shadow of death,
to them did light spring up" (Matt. iv. 16; cf. Smith, op. cit.,
95). The opposition of the two different sects was, at any rate, so
great that John's disciples needed a further instruction and a new
baptism "in the name of the Lord Jesus" to receive the Holy Ghost,
in order to be received into the Christian community. For example,
the twelve at Ephesus, who had simply received the baptism of John,
as well as the eloquent and literary Alexandrian, Apollo, who none
the less proclaimed the message of salvation (ta peri tou Iesou)
(Acts xviii. 24 sqq., xix. 1-7).

[216] Cf., Sepp, "Heidentum," i. 170 sq., 190 sq.; Winckler, "Die
babylonische Geisteskultur," 89, 100 sq. By this reference of the
Gospel story to the sun's course it appears that the activity of Jesus
from his baptism in the Jordan to his death, according to the account
of the Synoptics, only covered a year. It is the mythological year
of the sun's course through the Watery Region in January and February
until the complete exhaustion of its strength in December.

[217] Mark ix. 2-7.

[218] The horns (crescent) which he also shares with Jahwe, as the
Syrian Hadah shows (Winckler, "Gesch. Israels," ii. 94), recalls to
mind the Moon nature of Moses. Moses is, as regards his name, the
"Water-drawer." The moon is, however, according to antique views,
merely the water-star, the dispenser of the dew and rain, and the
root ma (mo), which, in the name of Moses, refers to water, is also
contained in the various expressions for the moon.

[219] "Contra Tryph.," xlvi.

[220] Cf. above, 112.

[221] Burnouf, op. cit., 195 sq.

[222] That in the closer description of this occurrence Old Testament
ideas have had their part has already been advanced by others. Thus
in the transfiguration of Jesus the transfiguration of Moses upon
Sinai without doubt passed before the mind of the narrator. And just
as Jesus took with him his three chief disciples on to the mount of
transfiguration, so Moses took his three trusted followers, Aaron,
Nadab, and Abihu, to partake in the vision of Jahwe (Strauss, "Leben
Jesu," ii. 269 sqq.).

[223] Rgv. x. 191; cf. i. 72, 5.

[224] Id. iii. 28, vi. 11.

[225] Max Müller, "Einleitung in die vergl. Religionswissenschaft,"
note to p. 219.

[226] Rigv. x. 90.

[227] The Rigveda describes Purusha as a gigantic being (cf. the
Eddic Ymir) who covers the earth upon all sides and stretches ten
fingers beyond. The Talmud, too (Chagiga, xii. 1), ascribes to the
first man Adam a gigantic size, reaching as he did with his head to
heaven and with his feet to the end of the world. Indeed, according
to Epiphanius ("Haeres." xix. 4), the Essenes made the size of Christ
too, the "second Adam," stretch an immeasurable distance.

[228] In Hebrew Messiah means "the anointed." But Agni too as God of
Sacrifices bears the name of the anointed, akta (above, p. 99). Indeed,
it appears as though the Greek Christ, as a translation of Messiah,
stands in relation to Agni. For the God over whom at his birth was
poured milk or the holy Soma cup and sacrificial butter, bore the
surname of Hari among the members of the cult. The word signified
originally the brightness produced by anointing with fat and oil. It
appears in the Greek Charis, an epithet of Aphrodite, and is contained
in the verb chrio, to anoint, of which Christos is the participial form
(cf. Cox, "Mythology of the Aryan Nations," 1903, 27, 254).

[229] The Bhagavadgîta shows that the idea of a self-sacrifice
was associated with Krishna also, whom we have already learnt to
recognise as a form of Agni, and that his becoming man was regarded
as such a sacrifice. It (ii. 16) runs: "I am the act of sacrifice,
the sacrifice of God and of man. I am the sap of the plant, the
words, the sacrificial butter and fire, and at the same time the
victim." And in viii. 4 Krishna says of himself: "My presence in
nature is my transitory being, my presence in the Gods is Purusha
(i.e., my existence as Purusha), my presence in the sacrifices is
myself incorporated in this body." But Mithras too offers himself for
mankind. For the bull whose death at the hands of the God takes the
central position in all the representations of Mithras was originally
none other than the God himself--the sun in the constellation of the
Bull, at the spring equinox--the sacrifice of the bull accordingly
being also a symbol of the God who gives his own life, in order
by his death to bring a new, richer and better life. Mithras, too,
performs this self-sacrifice, although his heart struggles against
it, at the command of the God of Heaven, which is brought to him by
a raven, the messenger of the God of Gods. (cf. Cumont, op. cit.,
98 sqq.). And just as according to Vedic ideas Purusha was torn in
pieces by the Gods and Dæmons and the world made out of his parts,
so too according to Persian views the World Bull Abudad or the Bull
Man Gayomart at the beginning of creation is supposed to have shed
his blood for the world, to live again as Mithras (Sepp., op. cit.,
i. 330, ii. 6 sq.).

[230] Cumont, "Myst. de Mithra," 101.

[231] Rgv. x. 16.

[232] Id. x. 16, 6.

[233] Id. lx.; cf. also Burnouf, op. cit., 176 sqq.

[234] Op. cit., vii. 3. He is Jahwe, the King of Jeru-Salem itself
(Josephus, "Ant.," x. 2), and corresponds to the Phoenician Moloch
(Melech) Sidyk, who offered his only born son, Jehud, to the people
as an expiation. Cf. supra, p. 77.

[235] Op. cit., xix. 13, xxxii. 29, xliv. 17, xvi. 25.

[236] Op. cit., lxv. 11.

[237] As is well known, the Germanic first man, Mannus, according to
Tacitus, was a son of the hermaphrodite Thuisto.

[238] Lev. xxiv. 5-9.

[239] Jos. iv. 1 sqq.; ch. v.

[240] Thus Helios also, the Greek Sun-God, the heavenly physician and
saviour, annually prepared the "Sun's Table" in nature, causing the
fruit to ripen, the healing herbs to grow, and inviting mortals to
the life-giving feast. "This Table of the Sun was always spread in
the land of the happy and long-living Ethiopians; even the twelve
Gods journeyed thither each year with Zeus for twelve days, i.e.,
in the last Octave of the old and new year, as though to the feast of
Agape" (Sepp., op. cit., i. 275). For the rest the number twelve had
throughout the whole of antiquity in connection with such ceremonial
feasts a typical signification. For example, among the Athenians, whose
common religious feasts were celebrated annually on the occasion of
the spring sacrifices; also among the Jews at least twelve persons had
to be assembled round the table of the Easter Lamb (Sepp., op. cit.,
ii. 313 sqq.).

[241] Ghillany, op. cit., 510 sqq.

[242] Preller, "Griech. Mythol.," 398, 850, and his "Röm. Mythol.,"
275.

[243] Strabo, xi. 2; Justin, xlii. 3.

[244] Preller, "Griech. Mytholog.," 110.

[245] It is worth while to observe that the High Priest Joshua
returned to Jerusalem at the head of twelve elders (Ezra ii. 2;
Nehem. vii. 7. Cf. Stade, "Gesch. d. V. Israel," ii. 102).

[246] Cf. Movers, op. cit., 539 sqq.; Sepp., "Heidentum," 271, 421.

[247] Cf. Jeremias, "Babyl. im N.T.," 69-80.

[248] Rgv. vi. 54.

[249] Cf. "The Hymns to Dadhikra," iv. 38-40.

[250] Cf. Burnouf, op. cit., 196. The connection between the Fire-God
and water is of extreme antiquity. As is well known, in the Edda Loki
seeks to escape the pursuit of the Gods in the shape of a salmon;
Hephaistos, too, after being cast forth from heaven remains concealed
in the sea until Dionysus brings him out; in Rome on the 22nd of
August fish from the Tiber used to be sacrificed to Vulcan, being cast
living into the fire in representation of the souls of men (Preller,
"Röm. Mythol.," ii. 151). It is uncertain whether or to what degree the
relations of the sun to the constellation of the Fishes have influenced
these images. As regards Babylon, where astrology underwent the most
accurate development, this can indeed be looked upon as certain. Here
Ea (Oannes), the God of Water and of Life, the father of the Redeemer
God Marduk, was represented under the form of a fish. Again, it was not
only to the Philistinian Dagon that fish as well as doves were sacred
(above, p. 118), but also to the Syrian Atargatis, the latter having
borne, as was said, the "Ichthus," or fish, and the worship of fish
being connected with devotion to her (Robertson Smith, "Religion of
the Semites," 174 sqq.). In Egypt Horus was the "divine fish," being
represented with a fish-tail and holding a cross in the hand. But the
Joshua of the Old Testament, in whom we believe we see the Israelite
original of the Christian Saviour, was also called a "Son of the Fish"
(Nun, Ninus, a form of Marduk, whose spouse or beloved, Semiramis,
is also a Fish Divinity and is the same as Derketo (Atargatis), the
Syrian Mother Goddess.) The Rabbinists called the Messiah son of Joseph
(see above, p. 80 sq.), Dag (Dagon) the Fish, and made him to be born
of a fish; that is, they expected his birth under the constellation of
the Fishes, on which account the Jews were long accustomed to immolate
a fish on expiatory feasts. Finally, the fish is also Vishnu's symbol,
in whose worship baptism of water takes an important place. Again,
the God is said in the form of a fish to have come to the rescue of
the pious Manu, the only just man of his time, the Indian Noah, and
to have steered the Ark through the flood, thus ensuring to mankind
its continuation. It is not difficult to suppose that this idea as
well influenced the symbols of Christianity through Mandaic (Gnostic)
channels. At any rate, it cannot be admitted at all that the symbol
of the fish first arose out of a mere play on letters so far as the
formula "Jesous Christos Theou Huios Soter" represents in five words
the expression of the quintessence of the Christian faith (cf. van den
Bergh van Eysinga, "Ztschr. d. Deutchen Morgenländ. Gesellschaft B.,"
ix., 1906, 210 sqq.).

[251] Cf. Iamblichus, "De Symbol. Aegyptiorum," ii. 7.

[252] Gunkel, op. cit., 32. sq.; Robertson, "Pagan Christs," 135 sq.

[253] Op. cit., v. 6 sq.

[254] Rev. xxi. 23.

[255] Hatch, "The Influence of Greek Ideas and Usages upon the
Christian Church," Hibbert Lectures, 1888, 300.

[256] John i. 7, 12; ix. 5; xii. 36, 46.

[257] Sepp., i. 353.

[258] Burnouf, op. cit., 186 sq.

[259] Cf., for example, F. X. Kraus, "Geschichte d. christl. Kunst,"
i. 105.

[260] "Hist. Rom.," i. 26.

[261] Cf. Zöckler, "Das Kreuz Christi," 1875, 62 sqq.; Hochart,
"Études d'histoire religieuse," 1890, chap, x., "La crucifix."

[262] Aringhi, "Roma subterranea," vi. ch. 23, "De Cervo."

[263] Cf. on the other hand Justin, "Apol.," i. 35.

[264] Esther v. 14, vii. 10.

[265] Cf. the picture of Marsyas hanging upon a tree-trunk in the
collection of antiquities at Karlsruhe; also the illustrations in
P. Schmidt, "Die Geschichte Jesu, erläutert," 1904.

[266] Movers, op. cit., 687; Nork, "Reallexikon," ii. 122 sq.; Frazer,
"Adonis, Attis, Osiris," 185 sq.

[267] Rev. ii. 7, xxii. 2.

[268] lxvi. 19.

[269] ix. 3, 4.

[270] Exod. xvii. 10 sqq.

[271] For particulars see Zöckler, op. cit., 7 sqq.; also Hochart,
op. cit., chap, viii., "Le symbole de la croix"; G. de Mortillet,
"Le signe de la croix avant le christianisme," 1866; Mourant Brock,
"La croix payenne et chrétienne," 1881; Goblet d'Alviella, "La
migration des symboles," 1891.

[272] Henry Petersen, "Über den Gottesdienst u. den Götterglauben
des Nordens während der Heidenzeit," 1882, 39 sqq. 95 sqq.

[273] Zöckler, op. cit., 21 sqq.

[274] Winckler, "Die babyl. Geisteskultur," 82.

[275] Tertullian, "Contra Haereses," 40.

[276] Burnouf, op. cit., 240.

[277] Goblet d'Alviella, op. cit., 61. sqq. Cf. also Ludw. Müller,
"Det saakaldte Hagekors Anvendelse og Betydning i Oldtiden," 1877.

[278] Op. cit., 296.

[279] One feels the words of Revelation quoted above brought to his
mind: "And madest them to be unto our God a kingdom and priests;
and they reign upon the earth!"

[280] "De errore profanae religionis," i. 5.

[281] Op. cit., § 48.

[282] "Apolog.," i. ch. 60.

[283] III. 12, vii. 3 sqq., ix. 4, xiv. 1, xx. 4, xxii. 4.

[284] Gal. vi. 17; Ephes. i. 13 sq.

[285] Mourant Brock, op. cit., 177 sqq., 178 sqq.

[286] So also in Tertullian when, with reference to the passage of
Ezekiel above quoted (ix. 5), he describes the Greek letter Tau as
"our [the Christians'] kind of cross" (nostra species crucis), not
because it had the shape of the gibbet upon which Jesus is supposed
to have died, but because it represented the seal or sign upon the
inhabitants of the New Jerusalem ("Contra Marcionem," iii. 22). And
when in the same work (iii. 18) he explains the horns of the "unicorn"
(ox?) mentioned in the Blessing of Moses (Deut. xxxiii. 17) as the two
arms of the cross, this happens only for the reason that the sign of
union and uplifting and the gibbet became commingled in his fancy into
the one and the same form (cf. also "Adv. Judaeos," 10, and Justin,
"Dial.," 91; also Hochart, op. cit., 365-369).

[287] Zöckler, op. cit., 14 sq.

[288] Frazer, "Adonis, Attis, Osiris," 174 sq., 276 sqq.

[289] Cf. on the whole subject Hochart, op. cit., 359 sqq.; P. Schmidt,
"Gesch. Jesu," 386-394. In spite of all his efforts Zöckler has
not succeeded in proving that Jesus was nailed to a piece of wood
having the form of a four-armed cross. The assertion that this form
of gibbet was borrowed by the Romans from the Carthaginians, and was
the usual one in late pre-Christian days, is simply a figment of the
imagination. All passages usually brought forward in support of this
traditional view either prove nothing, as the appeal to Luke xxiv. 39,
John xx. 20 and 25, or they refer to the symbol, not to the gibbet
of the cross, and consequently cannot serve to support the usual view
of the matter (Zöckler, op. cit., especially 78; 431 sqq.).

[290] "Geschichte der christlichen Kunst," 174.

[291] Cf. Detzel, "Christl. Ikonographie," 1894, 392 sqq.; Hochart,
op. cit., 378 sqq.

[292] Moreover, the so-called Flabellum, the fan, which in the
early Christian pictures of the birth of Christ a servant holds
before the child, shows the connection of the Christ Cult and that
of Agni. This fan, which was in use in divine service of the Western
Church as late as the fourteenth century, cannot be for the driving
away of insects or for cooling purposes, as is usually considered,
for this would obviously be in contradiction to the "winter" birth
of the Saviour. It refers to the fanning of the divine spark in the
ancient Indian fire-worship. In this sense it has been retained until
the present day in the Greek and Armenian rites, in which during the
Mass the fan is waved to and fro over the altar. A synopsis of all
the facts and illustrations bearing on the matter are to be found in
A. Malvert's "Wissenschaft und Religion," 1904.

[293] Of course the "Acts of the Apostles" is, and remains in spite
of all modern attempts at vindication (Harnack), a very untrustworthy
historical document, and the information it gives as to Paul's life
is for the most part mere fiction. We need not go so far as Jensen,
who disputes the existence at any time of an historical Paul ("Moses,
Jesus, Paulus. Drei Sagenvarianten des babylonischen Gottmenschen
Gilgamesch," 2 Aufl., 1909), but will nevertheless not be able
to avoid the view that the description of Paul, as Bruno Bauer
has already shown, represents an original, in any case very much
worked over, and in the opinion of many only a copy of the original,
which preceded it in the portrayal of the "chief of the apostles,"
Peter (cf., on the historical value of the Acts, also E. Zeller,
"Die Apg. nach ihrem Inhalt und Ursprung kritisch untersucht," 1854).

[294] Cf. H. Jordan, "Jesus und die modernen Jesusbilder. Bibl. Zeit-
u. Streitfragen," 1909, 36.

[295] "To create authors who have never written a letter, to forge
whole series of books, to date the most recent production back into
grey antiquity, to cause the well-known philosophers to utter opinions
diametrically opposed to their real views, these and similar things
were quite common during the last century before and the first after
Christ. People cared little at that time about the author of a work, if
only its contents were in harmony with the taste and needs of the age"
(E. Zeller, "Vorträge u. Abhdlg.," 1865, 298 sq.). "It was at that time
a favourite practice to write letters for famous men. A collection
of not less than 148 letters was attributed to the tyrant Phalaris,
who ruled Agrigentum in the sixth century B.C. Beyschlag has proved
that they were ascribed to him in the time of Antoninus. Similarly the
letters attributed to Plato, to Euripides and others, are spurious. It
would have been indeed strange if this custom of the age had not gained
an influence over the growing Christian literature, for such forgery
would be produced most easily in the religious sphere, since it was
here not a question of producing particular thoughts, but of being
an organ of the common religious spirit working in the individual"
(Steck, op. cit., 384 sq.; cf. also Holtzmann, "Einl. in das N.T.,"
2 Aufl., 223 sqq.).

[296] E. Vischer, "Die Paulusbriefe, Rel. Volksb.," 1904, 69 sq.

[297] Op. cit., ix. 3 sqq.

[298] 1 Cor. xv. 5 sqq.

[299] Cf. W. Seufert, "Der Ursprung und die Bedeutung des Apostolates
in der christlichen Kirche der ersten Jahrhunderte," 1887, 46, 157.

[300] An attempt is now being made to prove the contrary, citing 2
Cor. v. 16, which runs: "Wherefore we henceforth know no man after
the flesh: even though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet
now we know him so no more." The passage has been most differently
explained. According to Baur the "Christ after the flesh" refers to
the Jewish Messiah, the expected king and earthly Saviour of the Jews
from political and social distress, in whom even Paul believed at
an earlier date; and the meaning of the passage quoted is that this
sensuous and earthly conception of the Messiah had given place in him
to the spiritual conception ("Die Christuspartei in der kor. Gemeinde
Tüb. Ztschr.," 1831, 4 Heft, 90). According to Heinrici the "even
though we have known" is not a positive assertion of a point of view
which had once determined his judgment of Christ, but a hypothetical
instance, which excludes a false point of view without asserting
anything as to its actuality ("Komment," 289). According to Beyschlag
the passage is to be understood as asserting that Paul had seen Jesus
at Jerusalem during his life on earth. But with Paul there is no
talk of a mere seeing, but rather of a knowing. Lütgert disproves
all these different hypotheses with the argument that the words
"after the flesh" refer not to Christ but to the verb. "The apostle
no longer knows any one 'after the flesh,' and so he no longer knows
Jesus thus. At an earlier stage his knowledge of Christ was 'after
the flesh.' At that time he did not have the spirit of God which made
him able to see in Jesus the Son of God. Paul then is not protecting
himself from the Jews, who denied him a personal knowledge of Jesus,
but from the Pneumatics, who denied him a pneumatic knowledge of Jesus"
("Freiheitspredigt und Schwarmgeister in Korinth," 1908, 55-58).

[301] Gal. i. 11, 12; 1 Cor. ii. 10; 2 Cor. iv. 6.

[302] Gal. i. 17-19.

[303] Gal. ii. 1 sqq.

[304] Id. i. 19.

[305] Matt. xxviii. 10; Mark xiii. 33 sqq.; John xx. 17.

[306] In the opinion of the Dutch school of theologians, whom Schläger
follows in his essay, "Das Wort kürios (Herr) in Seiner Bezichung auf
Gott oder Jesus Christus" ("Theol. Tijdschrift," 33, 1899, Part I.),
this mention of the "Brother of the Lord" does not come from Paul;
as according to Schläger, all the passages in 1 Cor., which speak of
Jesus under the title "Kurios," are interpolated. "Missionary travels
of Brothers of Jesus are unknown to us from any other quarter, and
are also in themselves improbable" (op. cit., 46; cf. also Steck,
op. cit., 272 sq.).

[307] Similarly Origen, "Contra Celsum," i. 35; cf. Smith, op. cit.,
18 sq.

[308] Cf. as to this Sieffert in "Realenzyklop. f. prot. Theol. und
Kirche" under "James." In Ezr. ii. 2 and 9 there is also mention
of "Brothers" of the High Priest Joshua, by which only the priests
subordinate to him seem to be meant; and in Justin ("Dial c. Tryph.,"
106) the apostles are collectively spoken of as "Brothers of
Jesus." Similarly in Rev. xii. 17, those "who keep the word of God
and bear testimony to Jesus Christ" are spoken of as children of
the heavenly woman and also as Brothers and Sisters of the Divine
Redeemer, whom the dragon attempts to swallow up together with his
mother. As Revelation owes its origin to a pre-Christian Jesus-cult,
the designation of pious brothers of a community as physical brothers
of Jesus seems also to have been customary in that cult, antecedent
to the Pauline epistles and the Gospels.

[309] This is actually the view of the Dutch school of theologians.

[310] A. Kalthoff, "Was wissen wir von Jesus? Eine Abrechnung mit
Prof. D. Bousset," 1904, 17.

[311] 1 Cor. vii. 10.

[312] Id. ix. 14.

[313] 1 Cor. xi. 23.

[314] Cf. Brandt, "Die evangel. Geschichte u. d. Ursprung
d. Christentums," 1893, 296. Schläger also agrees with the Dutch
school, and produces telling arguments in favour of the view that
1 Cor. xi. 23-32 is an interpolation. "In our opinion," he says,
"the opening words, 'For I received of the Lord,' betray the same
attempt as can be seen in vii. 10 and ix. 14--and probably the attempt
of one and the same interpolator--to trace back Church institutions
and regulations to the authority of the Lord, of the Kurios. In the
three cases in which the latter is mentioned he is called 'the Lord,'
which is a fact well worthy of consideration in view of the usual
designation." Schläger also shows that verse 32 is a very appropriate
conclusion to verse 22; while as they stand now the logical connection
is broken in a forcible manner by the interpolation of the account of
the Last Supper. Another proof of the interpolation of 23-32 is to be
found, Schläger thinks, in the fact that in verse 33 as in verse 22
the Corinthians are addressed in the second person, while in verses
31 and 32 the first person plural is used (op. cit., 41 sq.). In
view of these notorious facts we can hardly understand how German
theologians can with such decision adhere to the authenticity of the
passage, reproaching those who contest it with "faults in method." As
against this view of theirs Schläger justly objects that "References to
words and events from the life of Jesus are so isolated in the Pauline
writings that we are entitled to and forced to raise the question as to
each such reference, whether it is not the reflection of a later age,
of an age which already placed confidence in the Gospel literature,
that brought Jesus' authority into the text" (Schläger, op. cit.,
36). And the critical theologians are convinced that the writings
of the New Testament are worked over to a great extent, rectified to
accord with the Church, and in many places interpolated. But when some
one else brings this to publicity, and dares to doubt the authenticity
of a passage, they immediately raise a great outcry, and accuse him
of wilfully misrepresenting the text; as if there were even one single
such passage on which the views of critics are not divergent!

[315] M. Brückner's opinion also is "that the Pauline account of the
scene at the Last Supper is in all probability not a purely historical
one, but is a dogmatic representation of the festival." And he adds:
"In any case just on account of its religious importance this scene
cannot be cited to prove Paul's acquaintance with the details of
Jesus' life" ("Die Entstehung der paulinischen Christologie," 1903,
44). Cf. also Robertson, "Christianity and Mythology," 388 sq.

[316] Holtzmann has, as a matter of fact, in an essay in the
"Christliche Welt" (No. 7, 1910) recently attempted to prove the
contrary, citing from Paul a number of moral exhortations, &c., which
are in accord with Jesus' words in the Gospels. But in this argument
there is a presupposition, which should surely be previously proved,
that the Gospels received their corresponding content from Jesus and
not, on the contrary, from Paul's epistles. It is admitted that they
were in many other respects influenced by Pauline ideas. Moreover,
all the moral maxims cited have their parallels in contemporary
Rabbinical literature, so that they need not necessarily be referred
back to an historical Jesus; also, such is their nature, that they
might be advanced by any one, i.e., they are mere ethical commonplaces
without any individual colouring. Thus we find the Rabbis in agreement
with Rom. xiii. 8 sq. and Gal. v. 14, which Holtzmann traces back
to Matt. vii. 12: "Bring not on thy neighbour that which displeases
thee; this is our whole doctrine." Rom. xiii. 7 has its parallel
not only in Matt. xxii. 21, but also in the Talmud, which runs:
"Every one is bound to fulfil his obligations to God with the like
exactness as those to men. Give to God his due; for all that thou hast
is from him." Rom. xii. 21 runs in the Sanhedrin: "It is better to
be persecuted than to persecute, better to be calumniated by another
than to slander." So that the remark need not necessarily be based on
Matt. v. 39; in fact, the last-named passage is not found at all in
the standard MSS., in the Codex Sinaiticus and Vaticanus. The phrase,
"to remove mountains" (1 Cor. xiii. 2). is a general Rabbinical one
for extolling the power of a teacher's diction, and so could easily be
transferred to the power of faith. So also the phrase, Mark ix. 50,
"Have salt in yourselves, and be at peace one with another"--which
Rom. xii. 18 is supposed to resemble--is a well-known Rabbinical
expression. Matt. v. 39 sq., which is supposed to accord with 1
Cor. vi. 7, runs in the Talmud: "If any one desires thy donkey, give
him also the saddle." Matt. vii. 1-5, on which Rom. ii. 1 and xiv. 4
are supposed to be based, equally recalls the Talmud: "Who thinks
favourably of his neighbour brings it about that fair judgments are
also made of him." "Let your judgment of your neighbour be completely
good." "Even as one measures, with the same measure shall it also
be measured unto him." Rom. xiv. 13 and 1 Cor. viii. 7-13 need not
necessarily be an allusion to Jesus' tender consideration for those who
are ruined by scandal, as we find in the Talmud: "It would have been
better that the evil-minded had been born blind, so that they would not
have brought evil into the world" (cf. also Nork, "Rabbinische Quellen
und Parallelen zu neutestamentlichen Schriftstellen," 1839). And
does Paul's usual phrase of greeting, "from God our Father and the
Lord Jesus Christ," really contain the avowal of the "Father-God"
preached by Christ? For the connection of the divine Son and bearer
of salvation with the "Father-God" is a general mythological formula
which occurs in all the different religions--witness the relation
between Marduk and Ea, Heracles and Zeus, Mithras and Ormuzd, Balder
and Odin. What then does it mean when Paul speaks of the "meekness
and humility of Christ," who lived not for his own pleasure, who
made no fame for himself, but was "submissive," assumed the form of
a servant, and was "obedient" to the will of his "father," even to
the death of the cross? All these traits are reproduced directly from
the description of the suffering servant of God in Isaiah, which we
know had a great part in shaping the personality of Jesus. Meekness,
humility, charitableness, and obedience are the specific virtues of
the pious of Paul's time. It was a matter of course for Christ also,
the ideal prototype of good and pious men, to be endowed with these
characteristics. Abraham was obedient when he sacrificed his son Isaac;
and so was the latter to his father, being also submissive in himself
bringing the wood to the altar and giving himself up willingly to
the sacrificial knife. And we know what a significant rôle the story
of Isaac's sacrifice has always played in the religious ideas of the
Jews. Moreover, the heathen redeemer deities--Marduk, of the Mandaic
Hibil Ziwâ, Mithras and Heracles--were also obedient in coming down
upon earth at the bidding of their heavenly father, burst the gates
of death, and gave themselves up, in the case of Mithras, even to be
sacrificed; and Heracles served mankind in the position of a servant,
fought with the monsters and horrors of hell, and assumed the hardest
tasks at the will of others.

[317] Kalthoff, "Die Entstehung d. Christentums," 1904, 15.

[318] P. Wernle, "Die Quellen des Lebens Jesu,
Religionsgesch. Volksbücher," 2 Aufl., 4.

[319] Gunkel, op. cit., 93.

[320] Gunkel also takes the view "that before Jesus there was a belief
in Christ's death and resurrection current in Jewish syncretic circles
(op. cit., 82). Now we have already seen (p. 57) that the term "Christ"
is of very similar significance to "Jesus." So that it is not at all
necessary to believe, as Gunkel asserted in the Darmstadt discussion,
that Paul in speaking of "Jesus" testifies to an historical figure,
because Jesus is the name of a person. "Jesus Christ" is simply a
double expression for one and the same idea--that is, for the idea
of the Messiah, Saviour, Physician, and Redeemer; and it is not at
all improbable, as Smith supposes, that the contradictions in the
conception of the Messiah in two different sects or spheres of thought
found their settlement in the juxtaposition of the two names.

[321] "Not the teacher, not the miracle-worker, not the friend of
the publicans and sinners, not the opponent of the Pharisees, is of
importance for Paul. It is the crucified and risen Son of God alone"
(Wernle, op. cit., 5).

[322] "Indeed, the historical Jesus in the sense of the Ritschlian
school would have been for Paul an absurdity. The Pauline theology
has to do rather with the experiences of a heavenly being, which
have, and will yet have, extraordinary significance for humanity"
(M. Brückner, "Die Entstehung der paulinischen Christologie," 1903,
12). Brückner also considers it settled "that Jesus' life on earth
had no interest at all for Paul" (op. cit., 46). "Paul did not
trouble himself about Jesus' life on earth, and what he may here
and there have learnt concerning it, with few exceptions, remained
indifferent to him" (42). Brückner also shows that the passages which
are cited to contradict this prove nothing as to Paul's more detailed
acquaintance with Jesus' life on earth (41 sqq.). He claims "to have
given the historical demonstration" in his work "that the Christian
religion is at bottom independent of 'uncertain historical truths'"
(Preface). And in spite of this he cannot as a theologian free himself
from the conception of an historical Jesus even with regard to Paul,
though he is, nevertheless, not in a position to show where and to what
extent the historical Jesus had a really decided influence over Paul.

[323] Movers, op. cit., 438 sqq.; Fraser, "Adonis, Attis, Osiris,"
42, 43, 47, 60, 79 sq.

[324] Cumont, "Textes et monuments," &c., i. 240; Pfleiderer,
"Urchristentum," i. 29 sqq.

[325] 1 Cor. x. 16.

[326] Pfleiderer, op. cit., 45.

[327] xi. 19 sqq.

[328] Smith, op. cit., 21 sq.

[329] Cf. Zimmern, "Zum Streit um die Christusmythe," 23.

[330] "I am the A and the O, the beginning and the end," the Revelation
of John makes the Messiah say (i. 8.). Is there not at the same time
in this a concealed reference to Adonis? The Alpha and the Omega, the
first and last letters of the Greek alphabet, form together the name of
Adonis--Ao (Aoos) as the old Dorians called the God, whence Cilicia
is also called Aoa. A son of Adonis and Aphrodite (Maia) is said
("Schol. Theocr.," 15, 100) to have been called Golgos. His name is
connected with the phallic cones (Greek, golgoi), as they were erected
on heights in honour of the mother divinities of Western Asia, who were
themselves, probably on this account, called Golgoi and golgon anássa
(Queens of the Golgoi), and is the same as the Hebraic plural Golgotha
(Sepp, "Heidentum," i. 157 sq.). Finally, was the "place of skulls"
an old Jebusite place of worship of Adonis under the name of Golgos,
and was the cone of rock, on which statue of Venus was erected in the
time of Hadrian, selected for the place of execution of the Christian
Saviour because it was connected with the remembrance of the real
sacrifice of a man in the rôle of Adonis (Tammuz)?

[331] Deut. xxi. 23.

[332] We notice that already in these distinctions the germs of those
endless and absurd disputes concerning the "nature" of the God-man lie
concealed, which later, in the first century A.D., tore Christendom
into countless sects and "heresies," and which gave the occasion for
the rise of the Christian dogma.

[333] Rom. i. 3.

[334] Rom. viii. 3; 2 Cor. viii. 9; Phil. ii. 7 sq.

[335] Gal. iii. 10 sqq.; Rom. iii. 9.

[336] Rom. iii. 20, iv. 15, v. 20, vii., sqq.

[337] Gal. iii. 19 sqq.

[338] Rom. vi. 9 sq.

[339] Id. v. 14.

[340] Rom. iv. 3 sqq.

[341] Rom. vi. 3 sqq.

[342] Gal. iii. 27.

[343] Cf. above, p. 137.

[344] 1 Cor. x. 16 sqq., xi. 23-27.

[345] 1 Cor. x. 3 sqq., 16-21.

[346] Cf., e.g., Pfleiderer, op. cit., 333.

[347] Cf. above, p. 49 sqq.

[348] Plato, "Symposium," c. 22.

[349] Col. ii. 9.

[350] Op. cit., 80.

[351] Cf. my work, "Plotin und der Untergang der antiken
Weltanschauung," 1907.

[352] Gal. ii. 20; Rom. viii. 4, 26.

[353] Id. viii. 14 sqq.

[354] 2 Cor. iii. 17.

[355] Gal. v. 26.

[356] 1 Cor. ii. 9, 14; Rom. xii. 2.

[357] Op. cit., 86.

[358] Wrede, Id.

[359] Id.

[360] Op. cit., 94.

[361] Wrede, op. cit., 85.

[362] 1 Cor. xv. 17.

[363] Cf. as to the whole question my essay on "Paulus u. Jesus"
("Das Freie Wort" of December, 1909).

[364] It is true that other theologians think differently on this
point, as, e.g., Feine in his book, "Jesus Christus und Paulus"
(1902), declares that Paul had "interested himself very much in
gaining a distinct and comprehensive picture of Jesus' activity and
personality" (!) (229).

[365] Kalthoff has in his writings laid especial stress on this social
significance of Christianity. Cf. also Steudel, "Das Christentum und
die Zukunft des Protestantismus" ("Deutsche Wiedergeburt," iv., 1909,
26 sq.), and Kautsky, "Der Ursprung des Christentums," 1908.

[366] xl. 26.

[367] In the same way Vollers also, in his work on "Die Weltreligionen"
(1907), seeks to explain the faith of the original Christian sects
in Jesus' death and resurrection as a blend of the Adonis (Attis)
and Christ faiths. He regards this as the essence of that faith,
that the existing views of the Messiah and the Resurrection were
transferred to one and the same person; and shows from this of what
great importance it must be that this faith met a well-prepared
ground, in North Syria, Anatolia, and Egypt, where it naturally
spread. But he treats the Jewish Diaspora of these lands as the
natural mediator of the new preaching or "message of Salvation"
(Gospel), and finds a proof of his view in this, "that the sphere of
the greatest density of the Diaspora almost completely coincides with
those lands where the growing and rising youthful God was honoured,
and that these same districts are also the places in which we meet,
only a generation after Jesus' death, the most numerous, flourishing,
and fruitful communities of the new form of belief." It is the Eastern
Mediterranean or Levantine horse-shoe shaped line which stretches
from Ephesus and Bithynia through Anatolia to Tarsus and Antioch,
thence through Syria and Palestine by way of the cult-centres Bubastes
and Sais to Alexandria. Almost directly in the middle of these lands
lies Aphaka, where was the chief sanctuary of the "Lord" Adonis,
and a little south of this spot lies the country where the Saviour
of the Gospels was born (op. cit., 152).

[368] Cf. O. Pfleiderer, "Die Entstehung des Christentums," 1905,
109 sqq.

[369] Luke xxiv. 33, xlix. 52; Acts i. 4, 8, 12 sqq.

[370] "Religionsgesch. Erklärung d. N.T.," 261. Cf. also Joel iii. 1
and Isa. xxviii. 11, and the Buddhist account of the first sermon of
Buddha: "Gods and men streamed up to him, and all listened breathlessly
to the words of the teacher. Each of the countless listeners believed
that the wise man looked at him and spoke to him in his own language;
though it was the dialect of Magadha which he spoke." Seydel,
"Evangelium von Jesus," 248; "Buddha-Legende," 92 sq.

[371] Stephen's so-called "martyrdom," whose feast falls on December
26th, the day after the birth of Christ, owes its existence to
astrology, and rests on the constellation of Corona (Gr., Stephanos),
which becomes visible at this time on the eastern horizon (Dupuis,
op. cit., 267). Hence the well-known phrase "to inherit the martyr's
crown." Even the theologian Baur has found it strange that the Jewish
Sanhedrin, which could not carry into effect any death sentence without
the assent of the Roman governor, should completely set aside this
formality in the case of Stephen; and he has clearly shown how the
whole account of Stephen's martyrdom is paralleled with Christ's death
(Baur, "Paulus," 25 sqq.).

[372] Smith, op. cit., 23-31.

[373] Frazer, "Golden Bough," iii. 197.

[374] Smith, op. cit., 30 sq.

[375] As to the small value of Papias' statement, cf. Gfrörer, "Die
heilige Sage," 1838, i. 3-23; also Lützelberger, "Die kirchl. Tradition
über den Apostel Johannes," 76-93. The whole story, according to
which Mark received the essential content of the Gospel named after
him from Peter, is based on 1 Peter v. 13, and merely serves the
purpose of increasing the historical value of the Gospel of Mark. "As
the first Gospel was believed to be the work of the Apostle Matthew,
and the second (Luke) the work of an assistant of Paul, it was very
easy to ascribe to the third (Mark) at least a similar origin as
the second, i.e., to trace it back in an analogous way to Peter;
as it would have seemed natural for the chief of the apostles,
longest dead, to have had his own Gospel, one dedicated to him,
as well as Paul. The passage 1 Peter v. 13, "My son Mark saluteth
you," gave a suitable opportunity for bestowing a name on the book,"
(Gfrörer, op. cit., 15; cf. also Brandt, "Die evangelische Geschichte
u. d. Ursprung des Christentums," 1893, 535 sq.)

[376] Op. cit., 58.

[377] xv. 39.

[378] 60.

[379] Id.

[380] The proper explanation for this should lie in the fact that
the Jesus-faith was set up as a sect-faith and not for "outsiders."

[381] 63 sqq.

[382] 68.

[383] 70.

[384] 3.

[385] It strikes the reader, who stands apart from the controversy, as
comical to find the matter characterised in the theological works on
the subject as "undoubtedly historical," "distinct historical fact,"
"true account of history," and so forth; and to consider that what
holds for one as "historically certain" is set aside by another as
"quite certainly unhistorical." Where is the famous "method" of which
the "critical" theologians are so proud in opposition to the "laity,"
who allow themselves to form judgments as to the historical worth or
worthlessness of the Gospels?

[386] Wrede, op. cit., 91.

[387] 104.

[388] 129.

[389] 131.

[390] 148.

[391] 148.

[392] Cf. Pfleiderer, "Entstehung des Christentums," 207, 213. All
estimates as to the time at which the Gospels were produced rest
entirely on suppositions, in which points of view quite different
from that of purely historical interest generally predominate. Thus
it has been the custom on the Catholic side to pronounce, not Mark
or Luke, but Matthew, to be the oldest source. "Proofs" for this
are also given--naturally, as it is indeed the "Church" Gospel: it
contains the famous passage (xvi. 18, 19) about Peter's possession of
the keys; how, then, should this not be the oldest? And lately Harnack
("Beiträge zur Einl. in das N.T.," iii., "Die Apostelgeschichte," 1908)
has tried to prove that the Acts, with the Gospel of Luke, had been
already produced in the early part of the year 60 A.D. But he does
not dare to come to a real decision; and his reasons are opposed by
just as weighty ones which are against that "possibility" suggested
by him (op. cit., 219 sqq.). Such is, first, the fact that all the
other early Christian writings which belong to the first century,
as the Epistle of Barnabas and the Shepherd of Hermas, evidently know
nothing of them. In the Epistle of Barnabas, written about 96 A.D.,
we read that Jesus chose as his own apostles, as men who were to
proclaim his Gospel, "of all men the most evil, to show that he had
come to call, not the righteous, but sinners, to repentance" (iv.). As
to this Lützelberger very justly remarks, "That is more even than our
Gospels say. For these are content to prove that Jesus did not come for
the righteous by saying that he ate with publicans and was anointed
by women of evil life; while in this Epistle even the Apostles must
be most wicked sinners, so that grace may shine forth to them. This
passage was quite certainly written neither by an Apostle nor by a
pupil of an Apostle; and also it was not written after our Gospels,
but at a time when the learned Masters of the Church had still a
free hand to show their spirit and ingenuity in giving form to the
evangelical story" ("Die hist. Tradition," 236 sq.). But also the
so-called Epistle of Clement, which must have been written at about
the same time, is completely silent as to the Gospels, while the
"Doctrine of the Twelve Apostles," which perhaps also belongs to the
end of the first century, cites Christ's words, such as stand in the
Gospels, but not as sayings of Jesus. Moreover, according to Harnack,
the "Doctrine of the Twelve Apostles" is the Christian elaboration
of an early Jewish document; whence we may conclude that its Words
of Christ have a similar origin in Jewish thought to that from which
the Gospels obtained them. (Cf. Lützelberger, op. cit., 259-271.)

[393] 81.

[394] 71.

[395] 81 sq.

[396] Id.

[397] The laity has, as is well known, but a slight suspicion of
this. So S. E. Verus' "Vergleichende Übersicht der vier Evangelien"
(1897), with the commentary, is to be recommended.

[398] 83.

[399] 83.

[400] 85 sq.

[401] "Jesus u. d. neutestamentl. Schriftsteller," ii. 43. Let us
take the final paragraph in E. Petersen's "Die wunderbare Geburt des
Heilandes," which reaches the zenith in proving the mythical nature
of the evangelical account of the Saviour's birth: "If, not because
we wish it, but because we are forced to do so by the necessity
of History, we remove the sentence, 'Conceived of the Holy Ghost,
born of the Virgin Mary'--Jesus nevertheless remains the 'Son of
God.' He remains such because he experienced God as his father, and
because he stands at God's side for us. Also, in spite of our setting
aside the miraculous birth as unhistorical, we are quite justified in
declaring 'Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God.'" M. Brückner
speaks similarly at the close of his otherwise excellent work. "Der
sterbende und auferstehende Gottheiland." For the person to whom such
phraseology is not--futile, there is no help.

[402] Cf. "Jesus Christus," a course of lectures delivered at the
University of Freiburg i. B., 1908.

[403] Schäfer, "Die Evangelien und die Evangelienkritik," 1908,
123. The story of the Church's development in the first century is
a story of shameless literary falsifications, of rough violence in
matters of faith, of unlimited trial of the credence of the masses. So
that for those who know history the iteration of the "credibility"
of the Christian writers of the age raises at most but an ironical
smile. Cf. Robertson, "History of Christianity," 1910.

[404] Cf. Hochart, "Études au sujet de la persécution des Chrétiens
sous Néron," 1885, cp. 4.

[405] A. Kalthoff, "Das Christusproblem, Grundzüge zu einer
Sozialtheologie," 1902, 14 sq.

[406] Kalthoff, "Die Entstehung des Christentums: Neue Beiträge zum
Christusproblem," 1904, 8.

[407] If v. Soden ("Hat Jesus gelebt?" vii. 45) has proved wrong the
comparison with the Tell-legend, and thinks I have "probably once more"
forgotten that Schiller first transformed a very meagre legend, which
was bound up in a single incident, from grey antiquity into a living
picture, he can know neither Tschudi nor J. v. Müller. Cf. Hertslet,
"Der Treppenwitz der Weltgeschichte," 6 Aufl., 1905, 216 sqq.

[408] The passage runs: "At this time lived Jesus, a wise man,
if he may be called a man, for he accomplished miracles and was a
teacher of men who joyously embrace the truth, and he found a great
following among Jews and Greeks. This one was the Christ. Although at
the accusation of the leading men of our people Pilate sentenced him to
the cross, those who had first loved him remained still faithful. For
he appeared again to them on the third day, risen again to a new life,
as the prophets of God had foretold of him, with a thousand other
prophecies. After him are called the Christians, whose sect has not
come to an end."

[409] "Einl. ins N.T.," 1836, 581.

[410] "Gesch. d. jüd. Volkes," i. 548.

[411] Origen, though he collected all Josephus' assertions which
could serve as support to the Christian religion, does not know
the passage, but probably another, in which the destruction of
Jerusalem was represented as a punishment for James' execution,
which is certainly a forgery.

[412] Cf. Kalthoff, "Entstehung d. Chr.," 16 sq. As to the whole
matter, Schürer, op. cit., 544-549.

[413] V. Soden proves the contrary in his work, "Hat Jesus
gelebt?" (1910), "in order to show the reliability of Drew's
assertions," from Clement's letter of 96 A.D., from Dionysius of
Corinth (about 170) from Tertullion and Eusebius (early fourth century,
not third, as v. Soden writes); and wishes to persuade his readers
that the persecution under Nero is testified to. The authenticity
of the letter of Clement is, however, quite uncertain, and has been
most actively combated, from its first publication in 1633 till
the present day, by investigators of repute, such as Semler, Baur,
Schwegler, Volkmar, Keim, &c. But as for the above-cited authors,
the unimportance of their assertions on the point is so strikingly
exhibited by Hochart that we have no right to call them up as witnesses
for the authenticity of the passage of Tacitus.

[414] Cf. Hochart, op. cit., 280 sqq.; H. Schiller,
"Gesch. d. röm. Kaiserzeit," 447, note.

[415] "Consulting the archives has been but little customary
among ancient historians; and Tacitus has bestowed but little
consideration on the Acta Diurna and the protocols of the Senate"
("Handb. d. klass. Altertumsw.," viii., 2 Abt., Aft. 2, under
"Tacitus"). Moreover, the difficulties of the passage from Tacitus have
been fully realised by German historians (H. Schiller, op. cit., 449;
"De. Gesch. d. röm. Kaiserreiches unter der Regierung des Nero," 1872,
434 sqq., 583 sq.), even if they do not generally go as far as to say
that the passage is completely unauthentic, as Volney did at the end
of the eighteenth century ("Ruinen," Reclam, 276). Cf. also Arnold,
"Die neronische Christenverfolgung. Eine historiche Untersuchung zur
Geschichte d. ältesten Kirche," 1888. The author does indeed adhere
to the authenticity of the passage in Tacitus, but as a matter of
fact he presupposes it rather than attempts to prove it; while in
many isolated reflections he gives an opinion against the correctness
of the account given by Tacitus, and busies himself principally in
disproving false inferences connected with that passage, such as the
connection of the Neronic persecution with the Book of Revelation. The
conceivable possibility that the persecution actually took place,
but that at all events the sentence of Tacitus may be a Christian
interpolation, Arnold seems never to have considered.

[416] Op. cit., 227.

[417] Kalthoff, "Christusproblem," 17.

[418] Weinel, "Jesus im 19 Jahrhundert," 1907, 68.

[419] "Babylonisches im Neuen Testament," 109 sq.

[420] "Zerduscht Nameh," ch. xxvi.

[421] Gfrörer, "Jahrhundert des Heils," Part II., 380 sqq.

[422] Luke iii. 23.

[423] Numb. iv. 3.

[424] Matt. xxi. 12 sqq.

[425] Zech. xiv. 21 runs in the Targum translation: "Every vessel
in Jerusalem will be consecrated to the Lord, &c., and at that time
there will no longer be shopkeepers in the House of the Lord." In
this there may have been a further inducement for the Evangelists to
state that Jesus chases the tradesmen from the Temple.

[426] 2 Sam. xvii. 23; cf. also Zech. xi. 12 sq.; Psa. xli. 10.

[427] Gfrörer, "Jahr. d. Heils," ii. 318 sqq.

[428] Cf. 1 Cor. x. 1 sq.

[429] 2 Kings iv. 19 sqq.

[430] Numb. i. 44; Jos. iii. 12; iv. 1 sqq. Cf. "Petrus-legende,"
51 sq.

[431] Cf. p. 127, note.

[432] Josephus, "Antiq.," iv. 8, 48; Philo, "Vita Mos.," iii.

[433] 2 Kings ii. 11.

[434] E.g. also the account of the arrest of Jesus (Matt. xxvi. 51
sqq.) cf. 2 Kings vi. 10-22.

[435] Matt. ix. 11 sq., xii. 8 sq., xv. 1 sqq., 11 and 20, xxviii. 18.

[436] Psa. cxlvi. 7.

[437] Bereshith Rabba zu Gen. xli. 1.

[438] Cf. esp. Acts xi. 2 sqq.

[439] Matt. v. 17 sqq.

[440] Id. viii. 11 sqq., x. 5, xxiii. 34 sqq., xxviii. 19 sqq.

[441] Cf. Lützelberger, "Jesus, was er war und wollte," 1842, 16 sqq.

[442] Cf. above, 59 sqq.

[443] It is given as a reason for his appearing first in Galilee
that the Galileans were first led into exile, and so should first
be comforted, as all divine action conforms to the law of requital
(Gfrörer, "Jahr. d. Heils," 230 sq. Cf. also Isa. viii. 23).

[444] Cf. above, 173 sq.

[445] See above, 171.

[446] Exod. xvi. 17 sqq.; Numb. xxi. 1 sqq.; Exod. vii. 17 sqq. 1
Kings xvii. 5 sqq.

[447] "Hist.," iv. 81.

[448] "Vespasian," vii.

[449] lxvi. 8.

[450] Isa. 1. 6 sq.

[451] Zech. xii 10.

[452] Cf. "Petruslegende," 24.

[453] Gen. xxvi. 6; cf. also Tertullian, "Adv. Jud.," 10.

[454] Cf. for this Brandt, "Die Evangelische Geschichte," esp. 53
sqq. Even such a cautious investigator as Gfrörer confesses that,
after his searching examination of the historical content of the
Synoptics, he is obliged to close "with the sad admission" that their
testimony does not give sufficient assurance to enable us to pronounce
anything they contain to be true, so far as they are concerned, with a
good historical conscience. "In this it is by no means asserted that
many may not think their views correct, but only that we cannot rely
on them sufficiently to rest a technically correct proof on them
alone. They tell us too many things which are purely legendary,
and too many others which are at least suspicious, for a prudent
historian to feel justified in a construction based on their word
alone. This admission may be disagreeable--it is also unpleasant to
me--but it is genuine, and it is demanded by the rules which hold
everywhere before a good tribunal, and in the sphere of history"
("Die hl. Sage," 1838, ii. 243).

[455] This is the case with the corresponding account in Mark,
while in Luke the dramatic presentation seems to be more worked
away, and the coherence, through the introduction of descriptions
and episodes (disciples at Emmaus) bears more the character of
a simple narrative. Cf. Robertson, "Pagan Christs," 186 sqq.; "A
Short History," 87 sqq. The fact that in almost all representations
of this kind both the scene at Gethsemane and the words spoken by
Jesus usually serve as signs of his personality (e.g. also Bousset's
"Jesus"--Rel. Volksb., 1904, 56), shows what we must think of the
historical value of the accounts of the life of Jesus; especially when
we consider that certainly no listeners were there, and Jesus cannot
himself have told his experience to his disciples, as the arrest is
supposed to have taken place on the spot.

[456] "Messiasgeheimnis," 143.

[457] Gen. xxiv.

[458] E. v. Hartmann, "Das Christentum des Neuen Testaments," 1905, 22.

[459] Op. cit.

[460] Cf. H. Jordan, "Jesus und die modernen Jesusbilder, Bibl. Zeit-
u. Streitfragen," 1909, 38.

[461] Mark vi. 1 sq.

[462] Mark xiii. 32.

[463] Mark iii. 20.

[464] 1 Kings xix.; cf. also Isa. xlii. 4.

[465] Cf. Brandt, op. cit., 553 sq.

[466] Hertlein treats of these Bases of Schmiedel in the
"Prot. Monatsheften," 1906, 386 sq.; cf. also Schmiedel's reply.

[467] Op. cit., 141.

[468] Bousset agrees with this in his work "Was wissen wir von
Jesus?" (1901). "Jesus' speeches are for the most part creations of
the communities, placed together by the community from isolated words
of Jesus." "In this, apart from all the rest, there was a powerful
and decided alteration of the speeches" (47 sqq.).

[469] Cf. Robertson, "Christianity and Mythology," 424 sqq., 429.

[470] Op. cit., 43.

[471] "Protest. Monatshefte," 1903, Märzheft.

[472] Op. cit., 161 sq.

[473] Matt. xviii. 15 sqq.

[474] Id. xxix. 3 sqq.

[475] Cf. Pfleiderer, "Urchristentum," i. 447 sq.; van den Bergh van
Eysinga, op. cit., 57 sqq.

[476] Smith, op. cit., 107 sqq.

[477] Cf. Nork, "Rabbinische Quellen und Parallelen zu
neutestamentlichen Schriftstellen," 1839.

[478] Cf. Robertson, "Christianity and Mythology," 440-457.

[479] Cf. v. Hartmann, op. cit., 131-143. It will always be a telling
argument against the historical nature of the sayings of Jesus that
Paul seems to know nothing of them, that he never refers to them
exactly; and that even up to the beginning of the second century,
with the exception of a few remarks in Clement and Polycarp, the
Apostles and Fathers in all their admonitions, consolations, and
reprimands, never make use of Jesus' sayings to give greater force
to their own words.

[480] V. Hartmann, op. cit., 44 sq.

[481] Let us hear what Clemen says against this: "In its reduction of
the Law to the Commandment of love, though this was already prominent
in the Old Testament [!] and even earlier had here and there [!] been
characterised as the chief Commandment, Christianity is completely
original [!]. And for Jesus the subordination of religious duties
to moral was consequent on this, though in this respect he would
have been equally influenced by the prophets of the Old Testament"
(op. cit., 135 sq.).

[482] "We must (as regards the moral ideals of Jesus) pay just as
much attention to what he does not treat of, to what he set aside,
as to what he clung to, indeed, setting it in opposition to all the
rest. At least this wonderfully sure selection is Jesus' own. We may
produce analogies for each individual thing, but the whole is unique
and cannot be invented" (v. Soden, op. cit., 51 sq.). This method,
practised by liberal theology, of extolling their Jesus as against all
other mortals, and of raising him up to a "uniqueness" in the absolute
sense, can make indeed but a small impression on the impartial.

[483] Wrede, "Paulus," 91.

[484] We admit that besides the eschatological grounding of his
moral demands, Jesus also makes use occasionally of expressions that
pass beyond the idea of reward. But they are quite isolated--as,
e.g., Matt. v. 48, "Be ye perfect, even as your Father in Heaven is
perfect," a phrase which is, moreover, in accord with Lev. xi. 44
and xix. 3--and without any fundamental significance. In general,
and in particular even in the Sermon on the Mount, that "Diamond in
the Crown of Jesus' ethics," the idea of reward and punishment is
prevalent (Matt. v. 12 and 46; vi. 1, 4, 6, 14, 18; v. 20; vi. 15;
vii. 1, &c.). Views may still differ widely as to whether it is
historically correct to estimate, as Weinel would like to, Jesus'
ethics in this connection really by the few sayings which go beyond
that idea. (Cf. v. Hartmann, op. cit., 116-124.) The favourite
declaration, however, is quite unhistorical, that Jesus was the
first who introduced into the world the principle of active love;
and that the Stoics, as Weinel represents, only taught the doing away
with all our passions, even that of love; or indeed that Jesus, who
wished salvation only to benefit the Jews, who forbade his people
to walk in the ways of the Gentiles, and who hesitated to comply
with the Canaanite woman's prayer, "raised to the highest degree of
sincerity" the "altruistic ideal," and that in principle he broke down
the boundaries between peoples and creeds with his "Love thy enemy,"
(Weinel, op. cit., 55, 57). As against this cf. the following passage
from Seneca: "Everything which we must do and avoid may be reduced to
this short formula of human obligation: We are members of a mighty
body. Nature has made us kindred, having produced us from the same
stuff and for the same ends. She has implanted in us a mutual love,
and has arranged it socially. She has founded right and equity. Because
of her commands to do evil is worse than to suffer evil. Hands ready
to aid are raised at her call. Let that verse be in our mouths and our
hearts: I am a man, nothing human do I despise! Human life consists
in well-doing and striving. It will be cemented into a society of
general aid not by fear but by mutual love. What is the rightly
constituted, good and high-minded soul, but a God living as a guest
in a human body? Such a soul may appear just as well in a knight as
in a freedman or in a slave. We can soar upwards to heaven from any
corner. Make this your rule, to treat the lower classes even as you
would wish the higher to treat you. Even if we are slaves, we may yet
be free in spirit. The slaves are men, inferior relatives, friends;
indeed, our fellow-slaves in a like submission to the tyranny of
fate. A friendship based on virtue exists between the good man and
God, yes, more than a friendship, a kinship and likeness; for the
good man is really his pupil, imitator, and scion, differing from
God only because of the continuance of time. Him the majestic father
brings up, a little severely, as is the strict father's wont. God
cherishes a fatherly affection towards the good man, and loves him
dearly. If you wish to imitate the gods, give also to the ungrateful;
for the sun rises even on the ungodly and the seas lie open even to the
pirate, the wind blows not only in favour of the good, and the rain
falls even on the fields of the unjust. If you wish to have the gods
well-disposed towards you, be good: he has enough, who honours and who
imitates them." Cf. also Epictetus: "Dare, raising your eyes to God,
to say, Henceforth make use of me to what end thou wilt! I assent,
I am thine, I draw back from nothing which thy will intends. Lead
me whithersoever thou wilt! For I hold God's will to be better than
mine." (Cf. also Matt. xxvi. 39.)

[485] Kautsky, "Ursprung des Christentums," 17.

[486] Op. cit., 3.

[487] "How is it conceivable," even Pfleiderer asks, "that the new
community should have fashioned itself from the chaos of material
without some definite fact, some foundation-giving event which could
form the nucleus for the genesis of the new ideas? Everywhere in the
case of a new historical development the powers and impulses which are
present in the crowd are first directed to a definite end and fastened
into an organism that can survive by the purpose-giving action of
heroic personalities. And so the impulse for the formation of the
Christian community must have come from some definite point, which,
from the testimony of the Apostle Paul and of the earliest Gospels, we
can only find in the life and death of Jesus" ("Entstehung des Chr.,"
11). But that the "testimony" for an historical Jesus is not testimony,
and that the "definite fact," the "foundation-giving event," is to
be looked for, if anywhere, in Paul himself and nowhere else--such
is the central point of all this analysis.

[488] Op. cit., 61 sq.

[489] "Von Reimarus bis Wrede," 396.

[490] ii. 44.

[491] "Gesch. Israels," ii. 1 sqq.

[492] Holtzmann, "Zum Thema 'Jesus und Paulus'" ("Prot. Monatsheft,"
iv., 1900, 465).

[493] Parerga, ii. 180.

[494] Neutest. Theol. ii. 4. Cf. R. H. Grützmacher: "Ist das liberale
Christusbild modern? Bibl. Zeit- und Streitfragen," 39 sq.

[495] Pfleiderer, "Entstehung d. Chr.," 108 sqq.

[496] Cf. Stendel, op. cit., 22.

[497] "Von Reimarus bis Wrede," 313.

[498] Gal. i. 24.

[499] 1 Cor. ii. 1; 2 Cor. xix. 9.

[500] Acts i. 3, x. 41.

[501] Acts i. 21 sq.

[502] Seufert, "Der Ursprung und die Bedeutung des Apostolates in der
christlichen Kirche der ersten Jahrhunderte," 1887, 143. Cf. also my
"Petruslegende," in which the unhistorical nature of the disciples
and apostles is shown, 50 sqq.

[503] Op. cit., 42.

[504] Cf. my work "Die Petruslegende."

[505] Cf. Hausrath, "Jesus und die neutestamentl. Schriftsteller,"
ii. 203 sqq.

[506] "Entstehung d. Chr.," 239.

[507] Cf. above, p. 31. sqq.

[508] Cf. Arnold Meyer, "Was uns Jesus heute ist. Rel. Volksb.,"
1907--a very impressive presentation of the liberal Protestant point
of view; also Weinel, "Jesus im 19ten Jahrhundert."

[509] "Entstehung d. Chr.," 98 sq.

[510] Weinel, indeed, resolutely denies that this is a real
characteristic of liberal Protestantism, and asserts that he has
looked for it in vain in any liberal theologian's book. But he need
only look in A. Meyer's work, which is cited by me, to find my idea
confirmed. There it is said of Jesus inter alia: "Not only should we
move and live in his love, but we are as he was, of the faith that
this love will overcome the world, that it is the meaning, end,
and true content of the world; that the power which uniformly and
omnipotently fills and guides the world, is nothing but the God in
whom he believed [was Jesus then a Pantheist?], and whom he calls
his heavenly father. As he believed, so let us also, that whoever
trusts in this God and lives in his love has found the meaning of
life and the power which preserves him in time and in eternity. Jesus
was the founder of our religion, of our faith, and of our inner
life" (31). According to Meyer, Jesus attracts us by his manner,
his Being, his love and his faith, we feel ourselves bound to him,
become kin with him and so live by his strength; he is called "the
voice of God to us," "our redeemer," and so forth. Those are simply
expressions which applied to God have at least a valid meaning,
but applied to the historical man Jesus are nothing but phrases,
and are to be explained purely psychologically from the fact that
liberalism in honouring the "unique" man Jesus does nevertheless
unwittingly allow the belief in his divinity to come into play. In
this atmosphere, obscured with phrases, the so-called "theology"
of liberal Protestantism moves. Moreover, Weinel himself quotes a
sentence of Herrmann with approval, which also gives expression
to the idea that Jesus is for Protestant liberalism a kind of
"demonstration of God" (80), and he adds himself: "It may indeed
be that our conception of the significance of Jesus has often been
expressed unskilfully enough. It may be that in discourses, lectures,
or other popular ways of speaking something is at times said which
may be so clumsily put as to give occasion for such things to be
said." Indeed, he himself maintains regarding Jesus: "Whoever places
the ideal of his life in him, he experiences God in him" (84). He
also finds that the desire for God of the Jews, Greeks, Semites,
and Germans "could be stilled in him." Taking into account these
expressions and the whole tone which it pleases Herr Weinel to adopt
towards the opponents of his standpoint, it appears time to remind him
once again of E. v. Hartmann's "Die Selbstzersetzung des Christentums"
(it is obvious he has only a third-hand acquaintance with the author
whose point of view he calls Neo-Buddhism, counting him among the
supporters of the morality of pity!) and especially of the chapter on
"Die Irreligiosität des liberalen Protestantismus." Here, in connection
with the lack of metaphysics displayed by liberal Protestantism (and
admitted even by Weinel) and the latter's principle of love, he says:
"If we transform the whole of religion into Ethics and soften down the
whole of Ethics into love, we thereby renounce everything that is in
religion besides love, and everything which makes love religious. We
thereby confess that the impulse of love is raised into religion
since religion properly so called has been lost. It is true religion
is not a shark, as the inquisitors thought, but at the same time it is
not a sea-nettle. A shark can at least be terrifying, a sea-nettle is
always feeble." Liberal Protestantism, as Hartmann sums it up, consists
"of a shapeless, poor, shallow metaphysic, which is concealed as far
as possible from critical eyes; of a worship successfully freed from
all mystery, but one that has become thereby by no means incapable of
being objected to; of an Ethics forcibly separated from Metaphysics
and on that account irreligious. It rests upon a view of the world
which by its worldliness and optimistic contentment with the world
is by no means in a position to give birth to a religion, and which
sooner or later will allow the remnants of religious feeling which
it brought with it to be smothered in worldly ease."

[511] Op. cit., 39.

[512] Cf. E. v. Hartmann, "Die Selbstzersetzung des Christentums und
die Religion der Zukunft," 2nd ed., 1874, especially chaps. vi. and
vii.

[513] Cf. W. v. Schnehen, "Der moderne Jesuskultus," 2nd ed., 1906;
also "Naumann vor dem Bankerott des Christentums," 1907.

[514] Cf. my work, "Die Religion als Selbstbewusstsein Gottes," 1906,
199 sq.

[515] Cf. my work, "Die Religion als Selbstbewusstsein Gottes," in
which the attempt has been made to form a general religious view of
the world in the sense mentioned.

[516] Cf. "Der Monismus, dargestellt in Beiträgen seiner Vertreter,"
2 vols., 1908.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Christ Myth, by Arthur Drews

