PART III.--ASSOCIATION.

The association of clergymen with ladies in works of charity affords
continual opportunities for the exercise of clerical influence over women.
A partnership in good works is set up which establishes interesting and
cordial relations, and when the lady has accomplished some charitable
purpose she remembers for long afterwards the clergyman without whose
active assistance her project might have fallen to the ground. She sees in
the clergyman a reflection of her own goodness, and she feels grateful to
him for lending his masculine sense and larger experience to the
realization of her ideas. There are other cases of a different nature in
which the self-esteem of the lady is deeply gratified when she is selected
by the clergyman as being more capable of devoted effort in a sacred cause
than women of inferior piety and strength of mind. This kind of clerical
selection is believed to be very influential in furthering clerical
marriages. The lady is told that she will serve the highest of all causes
by lending a willing ear to her admirer. Every reader will remember how
thoroughly this idea is worked out in "Jane Eyre," where St. John urges
Jane to marry him on the plain ground that she would be a valuable
fellow-worker with a missionary. Charlotte Brontë was, indeed, so strongly
impressed with this aspect of clerical influence that she injured the best
and strongest of her novels by an almost wearisome development of that
episode.

Clerical influence is immensely aided by the possession of leisure.
Without underrating the self-devotion of hard-working clergymen (which is
all the more honorable to them that they might take life more easily if
they chose), we see a wide distinction, in point of industry, between the
average clergyman and the average solicitor, for example. The clergyman
has leisure to pay calls, to accept many invitations, and to talk in full
detail about the interests that he has in common with his female friends.
The solicitor is kept to his office by strictly professional work
requiring very close application and allowing no liberty of mind.

Much might be said about the effect of clerical leisure on clerical
manners. Without leisure it is difficult to have such quiet and pleasant
manners as the clergy generally have. Very busy men generally seem
preoccupied with some idea of their own which is not what you are talking
about, but a leisurely man will give hospitality to your thought. A busy
man wants to get away, and fidgets you; a man of leisure dwells with you,
for the time, completely. Ladies are exquisitely sensitive to these
differences, and besides, they are generally themselves persons of
leisure. Overworked people often confound leisure with indolence, which is
a great mistake. Leisure is highly favorable to intelligence and good
manners; indolence is stupid, from its dislike to mental effort, and
ill-bred, from the habit of inattention.

The feeling of women towards custom draws them strongly to the clergy,
because a priesthood is the instinctive upholder of ancient customs and
ceremonies, and steadily maintains external decorum. Women are naturally
more attracted by custom than we are. A few men have an affectionate
regard for the sanctities of usage, but most men only submit to them from
an idea that they are generally helpful to the "maintenance of order;" and
if women could be supposed absent from a nation for a time, it is probable
that external observances of all kinds would be greatly relaxed. Women do
not merely submit passively to custom; they uphold it actively and
energetically, with a degree of faith in the perfect reasonableness of it
which gives them great decision in its defence. It seems to them the
ultimate reason from which there is no appeal. Now, in the life of every
organized Church there is much to gratify this instinct, especially in
those which have been long established. The recurrence of holy seasons,
the customary repetition of certain forms of words, the observance at
stated intervals of the same ceremonies, the adherence to certain
prescribed decencies or splendors of dress, the reservation of sacred days
on which labor is suspended, give to the religious life a charm of
customariness which is deeply gratifying to good, order-loving women. It
is said that every poet has something feminine in his nature; and it is
certainly observable that poets, like women, are tenderly affected by the
recurrence of holy seasons, and the observance of fixed religious rites. I
will only allude to Keble's "Christian Year," because in this instance it
might be objected that the poet was secondary to the Christian; but the
reader will find instances of the same sentiment in Tennyson, as, for
example, in the profoundly affecting allusions to the return of Christmas
in "In Memoriam." I could not name another occupation so closely and
visibly bound up with custom as the clerical profession, but for the sake
of contrast I may mention one or two others that are completely
disconnected from it. The profession of painting is an example, and so is
that of literature. An artist, a writer, has simply nothing whatever to do
with custom, except as a private man. He may be an excellent and a famous
workman without knowing Sunday from week-day or Easter from Lent. A man of
science is equally unconnected with traditional observances.

It may be a question whether a celibate or a married clergy has the
greater influence over women.

There are two sides to this question. The Church of Rome is, from the
worldly point of view, the most astute body of men who have ever leagued
themselves together in a corporation; and that Church has decided for
celibacy, rejecting thereby all the advantages to be derived from rich
marriages and good connections. In a celibate church the priest has a
position of secure dignity and independence. It is known from the first
that he will not marry, so there is no idle and damaging gossip about his
supposed aspirations after fortune, or tender feelings towards beauty.
Women can treat him with greater confidence than if he were a possible
suitor, and then can confess to him, which is felt to be difficult with a
married or a marriageable clergy. By being decidedly celibate the clergy
avoid the possible loss of dignity which might result from allying
themselves with families in a low social position. They are simply
priests, and escape all other classification. A married man is, as it
were, made responsible for the decent appearance, the good manners, and
the proper conduct of three different sets of people. There is the family
he springs from, there is his wife's family, and, lastly, there is the
family in his own house. Any one of these may drag a man down socially
with almost irresistible force. The celibate priest is only affected by
the family he springs from, and is generally at a distance from that. He
escapes the invasion of his house by a wife's relations, who might
possibly be vulgar, and, above all, he escapes the permanent degradation
of a coarse and ill-dressed family of his own. No doubt, from the
Christian point of view, poverty is as honorable as wealth; but from the
worldly point of view its visible imperfections are mean, despicable, and
even ridiculous. In the early days of English Protestants the liberty to
marry was ruinous to the social position of the clergy. They generally
espoused servant-girls or "a lady's maid whose character had been blown
upon, and who was therefore forced to give up all hope of catching the
steward."[17] Queen Elizabeth issued "special orders that no clergyman
should presume to marry a servant-girl without the consent of the master
or mistress." "One of the lessons most earnestly inculcated on every girl
of honorable family was to give no encouragement to a lover in orders; and
if any young lady forgot this precept she was almost as much disgraced as
by an illicit amour." The cause of these low marriages was simply poverty,
and it is needless to add that they increased the evil. "As children
multiplied and grew, the household of the priest became more and more
beggarly. Holes appeared more and more plainly in the thatch of his
parsonage and in his single cassock. His boys followed the plough, and his
girls went out to service."

When clergymen can maintain appearances they gain one advantage from
marriage which increases their influence with women. The clergyman's wife
is almost herself in holy orders, and his daughter often takes an equally
keen interest in ecclesiastical matters. These "clergywomen," as they have
been called, are valuable allies, through whom much may be done that
cannot be effected directly. This is the only advantage on the side of
marriage, and it is but relative; for a celibate clergy has also its
female allies who are scarcely less devoted; and in the Church of Rome
there are great organized associations of women entirely under the control
of ecclesiastics. Again, there is a lay element in a clergyman's family
which brings the world into his own house, to the detriment of its
religious character. The sons of the clergy are often anything but
clerical in feeling. They are often strongly laic, and even sceptical, by
a natural reaction from ecclesiasticism. On the whole, therefore, it seems
certain that an unmarried clergy more easily maintains both its own
dignity and the distinction between itself and the laity.

Auricular confession is so well known as a means of influencing women that
I need scarcely do more than mention it; but there is one characteristic
of it which is little understood by Protestants. They fancy (judging from
Protestant feelings of antagonism) that confession must be felt as a
tyranny. A Roman Catholic woman does not feel it to be an infliction that
the Church imposes, but a relief that she affords. Women are not naturally
silent sufferers. They like to talk about their anxieties and interests,
especially to a patient and sympathetic listener of the other sex who will
give them valuable advice. There is reason to believe that a good deal of
informal confession is done by Protestant ladies; in the Church of Rome it
is more systematic and leads to a formal absolution. The subject which the
speaker has to talk about is that most interesting of all subjects, self.
In any other place than a confessional to talk about self at any length is
an error; in the confessional it is a virtue. The truth is that pious
Roman Catholic women find happiness in the confessional and try the
patience of the priests by minute accounts of trifling or imaginary sins.
No doubt confession places an immense power in the hands of the Church,
but at an incalculable cost of patience. It is not felt to weigh unfairly
on the laity, because the priest who to-day has forgiven your faults will
to-morrow kneel in penitence and ask forgiveness for his own. I do not see
in the confessional so much an oppressive institution as a convenience for
both parties. The woman gets what she wants,--an opportunity of talking
confidentially about herself; and the priest gets what he wants,--an
opportunity of learning the secrets of the household.

Nothing has so powerfully awakened the jealousy of laymen as this
institution of the confessional. The reasons have been so fully treated by
Michelet and others, and are in fact so obvious, that I need not repeat
them.

The dislike for priests that is felt by many Continental laymen is
increased by a cause that helps to win the confidence of women. "Observe,"
the laymen say, "with what art the priest dresses so as to make women feel
that he is without sex, in order that they may confess to him more
willingly. He removes every trace of hair from his face, his dress is half
feminine, he hides his legs in petticoats, his shoulders under a tippet,
and in the higher ranks he wears jewelry and silk and lace. A woman would
never confess to a man dressed as we are, so the wolf puts on sheep's
clothing."

Where confession is not the rule the layman's jealousy is less acrid and
pungent in its expression, but it often manifests itself in milder forms.
The pen that so clearly delineated the Rev. Charles Honeyman was impelled
by a layman's natural and pardonable jealousy. A feeling of this kind is
often strong in laymen of mature years. They will say to you in
confidence, "Here is a man about the age of one of my sons, who knows no
more concerning the mysteries of life and death than I do, who gets what
he thinks he knows out of a book which is as accessible to me as it is to
him, and yet who assumes a superiority over me which would only be
justifiable if I were ignorant and he enlightened. He calls me one of his
sheep. I am not a sheep relatively to him. I am at least his equal in
knowledge, and greatly his superior in experience. Nobody but a parson
would venture to compare me to an animal (such a stupid animal too!) and
himself to that animal's master. His one real and effective superiority is
that he has all the women on his side."

You poor, doubting, hesitating layman, not half so convinced as the ladies
of your family, who and what are you in the presence of a man who comes
clothed with the authority of the Church? If you simply repeat what he
says, you are a mere echo, a feeble repetition of a great original, like
the copy of a famous picture. If you try to take refuge in philosophic
indifference, in silent patience, you will be blamed for moral and
religious inertia. If you venture to oppose and discuss, you will be the
bad man against the good man, and as sure of condemnation as a murderer
when the judge is putting on the black cap. There is no resource for you
but one, and that does not offer a very cheering or hopeful prospect. By
the exercise of angelic patience, and of all the other virtues that have
been preached by good men from Socrates downwards, you may in twenty or
thirty years acquire some credit for a sort of inferior goodness of your
own,--a pinchbeck goodness, better than nothing, but not in any way
comparable to the pure golden goodness of the priest; and when you come to
die, the best that can be hoped for your disembodied soul will be mercy,
clemency, indulgence; not approbation, welcome, or reward.




ESSAY XIV.

WHY WE ARE APPARENTLY BECOMING LESS RELIGIOUS.


It has happened to me on more than one occasion to have to examine papers
left by ladies belonging to the last generation, who had lived in the
manner most esteemed and respected by the general opinion of their time,
and who might, without much risk of error, be taken for almost perfect
models of English gentlewomen as they existed before the present
scientific age. The papers left by these ladies consisted either of
memoranda of their private thoughts, or of thoughts by others which seemed
to have had an especial interest for them. I found that all these papers
arranged themselves naturally and inevitably under two heads: either they
concerned family interests and affections, or they were distinctly
religious in character, like the religious meditations we find in books of
devotion.

There may be nothing extraordinary in this. Thousands of other ladies may
have left religious memoranda; but consider what a preponderance of
religious ideas is implied when written thoughts are entirely confined to
them! The ladies in question lived in the first half of the nineteenth
century, a period of great intellectual ferment, of the most important
political and social changes, and of wonderful material progress; but
they did not seem to have taken any real interest in these movements. The
Bible and the commentaries of the clergy satisfied not only their
spiritual but also their intellectual needs. They seem to have desired no
knowledge of the universe, or of the probable origin and future of the
human race, which the Bible did not supply. They seem to have cared for no
example of human character and conduct other than the scriptural examples.

This restfulness in Biblical history and philosophy, this substitution of
the Bible for the world as a subject of study and contemplation, this
absence of desire to penetrate the secrets of the world itself, this want
of aspiration after any ideal more recent than the earlier ages of
Christianity, permitted a much more constant and uninterrupted dwelling
with what are considered to be religious ideas than is possible to any
active and inquiring mind of the present day. Let it be supposed, for
example, that a person to whom the Bible was everything desired
information about the origin of the globe, and of life upon it; he would
refer to the Book of Genesis as the only authority, and this reference
would have the character of a religious act, and he would get credit for
piety on account of it; whilst a modern scientific student would refer to
some great modern paleontologist, and his reference would not have the
character of a religious act, nor bring him any credit for piety; yet the
prompting curiosity, the desire to know about the remote past, would be
exactly the same in both cases. And I think it may be easily shown that if
the modern scientific student appears to be less religious than others
think he ought to be, it is often because he possesses and uses more
abundant sources of information than those which were accessible to the
ancient Jews. It is not his fault if knowledge has increased; he cannot be
blamed if he goes where information is most copious and most exact; yet
his preference for such information gives an unsanctified aspect to his
studies. The study of the most ancient knowledge wears a religious aspect,
but the study of modern knowledge appears to be non-religious.

Again, when we come to the cultivation of the idealizing faculties, of the
faculties which do not seek information merely, but some kind of
perfection, we find that the very complexity of modern life, and the
diversity of the ideal pleasures and perfections that we modern men
desire, have a constant tendency to take us outside of strictly religious
ideals. As long as the writings which are held to be sacred supply all
that our idealizing faculties need, so long will our imaginative powers
exercise themselves in what is considered to be a religious manner, and we
shall get credit for piety; but when our minds imagine what the sacred
writers could not or did not conceive, and when we seek help for our
imaginative faculty in profane writers, we appear to be less religious. So
it is with the desire to study and imitate high examples of conduct and
character. There is no nobler or more fruitful instinct in man than a
desire like this, which is possible only to those who are at once humble
and aspiring. An ancient Jew who had this noble instinct could satisfy it
by reading the sacred books of the Hebrews, and so his aspiration appeared
to be wholly religious. It is not so with an active-minded young
Englishman of the present day. He cannot find the most inspiriting models
amongst the ancient Hebrews, for the reason that their life was altogether
so much simpler and more primitive than ours. They had nothing that can
seriously be called science; they had not any organized industry; they had
little art, and hardly any secular literature, so that in these directions
they offer us no examples to follow. Our great inspiriting examples in
these directions are to be found either in the Renaissance or in recent
times, and therefore in profane biography. From this it follows that an
active modern mind seems to study and follow non-religious examples, and
so to differ widely, and for the worse, from the simpler minds of old
time, who were satisfied with the examples they found in their Bibles.
This appearance is misleading; it is merely on the surface; for if we go
deeper and do not let ourselves be deceived by the words "sacred" and
"profane," we shall find that when a simple mind chooses a model from a
primitive people, and a cultivated one chooses a model from an advanced
people, and from the most advanced class in it, they are both really doing
the same thing, namely, seeking ideal help of the kind which is best for
each. Both of them are pursuing the same object,--a mental discipline and
elevation which may be comprised under the general term _virtue_; the only
difference being that one is studying examples of virtue in the history of
the ancient Jews, whilst the other finds examples of virtue more to his
own special purpose in the lives of energetic Englishmen, Frenchmen, or
Germans.

A hundred such examples might be mentioned, for every occupation worth
following has its own saints and heroes; but I will confine myself to two.
The first shall be a French gentleman of the eighteenth century, to whom
life offered in the richest profusion everything that can tempt a man to
what is considered an excusable and even a respectable form of idleness.
He had an independent fortune, excellent health, a good social position,
and easy access to the most lively, the most entertaining, the most
amiable society that ever was, namely, that of the intelligent French
nobility before the Revolution. There is no merit in renouncing what we do
not enjoy; but he enjoyed all pleasant things, and yet renounced them for
a higher and a harder life. At the age of thirty-two he retired to the
country, made a rule of early rising and kept it, sallied forth from his
house every morning at five, went and shut himself up in an old tower with
a piece of bread and a glass of water for his breakfast, worked altogether
eleven or twelve hours a day in two sittings, and went to bed at nine.
This for eight months in the year, regularly, the remaining four being
employed in scientific and administrative work at the Jardin des Plantes.
He went on working in this way for forty years, and in the whole course of
that time never let pass an ill-considered page or an ill-constructed
sentence, but always did his best, and tried to make himself able to do
better.

Such was the great life of Buffon; and in our own time another great life
has come to its close, inferior to that of Buffon only in this, that as it
did not begin in luxury, the first renunciation was not so difficult to
make. Yet, however austere his beginnings, it is not a light or easy thing
for a man to become the greatest intellectual worker of his time, so that
one of his days (including eight hours of steady nocturnal labor) was
equivalent to two or more of our days. No man of his time in Europe had so
vast a knowledge of literature and science in combination; yet this
knowledge was accompanied by perfect modesty and by a complete
indifference to vulgar distinctions and vain successes. For many years he
was the butt of coarse and malignant misrepresentation on the part of
enemies who easily made him odious to a shallow society; but he bore it
with perfect dignity, and retained unimpaired the tolerance and charity of
his nature. His way of living was plain and frugal; he even contented
himself with narrow dwellings, though the want of space must have
occasioned frequent inconvenience to a man of his pursuits. He
scrupulously fulfilled his domestic duties, and made use of his medical
education in ministering gratuitously to the poor. Such was his courage
that when already advanced in life he undertook a gigantic task, requiring
twenty years of incessant labor; and such were his industry and
perseverance that he brought it to a splendidly successful issue. At
length, after a long life of duty and patience, after bearing calumny and
ridicule, he was called to endure another kind of suffering,--that of
incessant physical pain. This he bore with perfect fortitude, retaining to
the last his mental serenity, his interest in learning, and a high-minded
patriotic thoughtfulness for his country and its future, finding means in
the midst of suffering to dictate long letters to his fellow-citizens on
political subjects, which, in their calm wisdom, stood in the strongest
possible contrast to the violent party writing of the hour.

Such was the great life of Littré; and now consider whether he who studies
lives like these, and wins virtue from their austere example, does not
occupy his thoughts with what would have been considered religious
aspirations, if these two men, instead of being Frenchmen of the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, had happened to be ancient Jews. If
it had been possible for so primitive a nation as the Jewish to produce
men of such steady industry and so large a culture, we should have read
the story of their lives in the Jewish sacred books, and then it would
have been a part of the popular religion to study them, whereas now the
study of such biography is held to be non-religious, if not (at least in
the case of Littré) positively irreligious. Yet surely when we think of
the virtues which made these lives so fruitful, our minds are occupied in
a kind of religious thought; for are we not thinking of temperance,
self-discipline, diligence, perseverance, patience, charity, courage,
hope? Were not these men distinguished by their aspiration after higher
perfection, by a constant desire to use their talents well, and by a
vigilant care in the employment of their time? And are not these virtues
and these aspirations held to be parts of a civilized man's religion, and
the best parts?

The necessity for an intellectual expansion beyond the limits of the Bible
was felt very strongly at the time of the Renaissance, and found ample
satisfaction in the study of the Greek and Latin classics. There are many
reasons why women appear to be more religious than men; and one of them is
because women study only one collection of ancient writings, whilst men
have been accustomed to study three; consequently that which women study
(if such a word is applicable to devotional, uncritical reading) occupies
their minds far more exclusively than it occupies the mind of a classical
scholar. But, though the intellectual energies of men were for a time
satisfied with classical literature, they came at length to look outside
of that as their fathers had looked outside of the Bible. Classical
literature was itself a kind of religion, having its own sacred books; and
it had also its heretics,--the students of nature,--who found nature more
interesting than the opinions of the Greeks and Romans. Then came the
second great expansion of the human mind, in the midst of which we
ourselves are living. The Renaissance opened for it a world of mental
activity which had the inappreciable intellectual advantage of lying well
outside of the popular beliefs and ideas, so that cultivated men found in
it an escape from the pressure of the uneducated; but the new scientific
expansion offers us a region governed by laws of a kind peculiar to
itself, which protect those who conform to them against every assailant.
It is a region in which authority is unknown, for, however illustrious any
great man may appear in it, every statement that he makes is subject to
verification. Here the knowledge of ancient writers is continually
superseded by the better and more accurate knowledge of their successors;
so that whereas in religion and learning the most ancient writings are the
most esteemed, in science it is often the most recent, and even these have
no authority which may not be called in question freely by any student.
The new scientific culture is thus encouraging a habit of mind different
from old habits, and which in our time has caused such a degree of
separation that the most important and the most interesting of all topics
are those upon which we scarcely dare to venture for fear of being
misunderstood.

If I had to condense in a short space the various reasons why we are
apparently becoming less religious, I should say that it is because
knowledge and feeling, embodied or expressed in the sciences and arts, are
now too fully and too variously developed to remain within the limits of
what is considered sacred knowledge or religious emotion. It was possible
for them to remain well within those limits in ancient times, and it is
still possible for a mind of very limited activity and range to dwell
almost entirely in what was known or felt at the time of Christ; but this
is not possible for an energetic and inquiring mind, and the consequence
is that the energetic mind will seem to the other, by contrast, to be
negligent of holy things, and too much occupied with purely secular
interests and concerns. A great misunderstanding arises from this, which
has often had a lamentable effect on intercourse between relations and
friends. Pious ladies, to whom theological writings appear to contain
almost everything that it is desirable to know, often look with secret
misgiving or suspicion on young men of vigorous intellect who cannot rest
satisfied with the old knowledge, and what such ladies vaguely hear of the
speculations of the famous scientific leaders inspires them with profound
alarm. They think that we are becoming less religious because theological
writings do not occupy the same space in our time and thoughts as they do
in theirs; whereas, if such a matter could be put to any kind of positive
test, it would probably be found that we know more, even of their own
theology, than they do, and that, instead of being indifferent to the
great problems of the universe, we have given to such problems an amount
of careful thought far surpassing, in mental effort, their own simple
acquiescence. The opinions of a thoughtful and studious man in the present
day have never been lightly come by; and if he is supposed to be less
religious than his father or his grandfather it may be that his religion
is different from theirs, without being either less earnest or less
enlightened. There is, however, one point of immense importance on which I
believe that we really are becoming less religious, indeed on that point
we seem to be rapidly abandoning the religious principle altogether; but
the subject is of too much consequence to be treated at the end of an
Essay.




ESSAY XV.

HOW WE ARE REALLY BECOMING LESS RELIGIOUS.


The reader may remember how, after the long and unsuccessful siege of
Syracuse, the Athenian general Nikias, seeing his discouraged troops ill
with the fever from the marshes, determined to raise the siege; and that,
when his soldiers were preparing to retreat, and striking their tents for
the march, there occurred an eclipse of the moon. Nikias, in his anxiety
to know what the gods meant by this with reference to him and his army, at
once consulted a soothsayer, who told him that he would incur the Divine
anger if he did not remain where he was for three times nine days. He
remained, doing nothing, allowing his troops to perish and his ships to be
shut up by a line of the enemy's vessels chained together across the
entrance of the port. At length the three times nine days came to an end,
and what was left of the Athenian army had to get out of a situation that
had become infinitely more difficult during its inaction. The ships tried
to get out in vain; the army was able to retreat by land, but only to be
harassed by the enemy, and finally placed in such distress that it was
compelled to surrender. Most of the remnant died miserably in the old
quarries of Syracuse.

The conduct of Nikias throughout these events was in the highest degree
religious. He was fully convinced that the gods concerned themselves about
him and his doings, that they were watching over him, and that the eclipse
was a communication from them not to be neglected without a breach of
religious duty. He, therefore, in the spirit of the most perfect religious
faith, which we are compelled to admire for its sincerity and
thoroughness, shut his eyes resolutely to all the visible facts of a
situation more disastrous every day, and attended only to the invisible
action of the invisible gods, of which nothing could be really known by
him. For twenty-seven days he went on quietly sacrificing his soldiers to
his faith, and only moved at last when he believed that the gods allowed
it.

In contrast with this, let us ask what we think of an eclipse ourselves,
and how far any religious emotion, determinant of action or of inaction,
is connected with the phenomenon in our experience. We know, in the first
place, that eclipses belong to the natural order, and we do not feel
either grateful to the supernatural powers, or ungrateful, with regard to
them. Even the idea that eclipses demonstrate the power of God is hardly
likely to occur to us, for we constantly see terrestrial objects eclipsed
by cast shadows; and the mere falling of a shadow is to us only the
natural interruption of light by the intervention of any opaque object. In
the true theory of eclipses there is absolutely no ground whatever for
religious emotion, and accordingly the phenomenon is now entirely
disconnected from religious ideas. The consequence is that where the
Athenian general had a strong motive for religious emotion, a motive so
strong that he sacrificed his army to the supposed will of Heaven, a
modern general in the same situation would feel no emotion and make no
sacrifice.

If this process stopped at eclipses the result would be of little
importance, as eclipses of the celestial bodies are not frequently
visible, and to lose the opportunity of emotion which they present is not
a very sensible loss. But so far is the process from stopping at eclipses,
that exactly the same process is going on with regard to thousands of
other phenomena which are one by one, yet with increasing rapidity,
ceasing to be regarded as special manifestations of Divine will, and
beginning to be regarded as a part of that order of nature with which, to
quote Professor Huxley's significant language, "nothing interferes." Every
one of these transferrences from supernatural government to natural order
deprives the religious sentiment of one special cause or motive for its
own peculiar kind of emotion, so that we are becoming less and less
accustomed to such emotion (as the opportunities for it become less
frequent), and more and more accustomed to accept events and phenomena of
all kinds as in that order of nature "with which nothing interferes."

This single mental conception of the unfailing regularity of nature is
doing more in our time to affect the religious condition of thoughtful
people than could be effected by many less comprehensive conceptions.

It has often been said, not untruly, that merely negative arguments have
little permanent influence over the opinions of men, and that institutions
which have been temporarily overthrown by negation will shortly be set up
again, and flourish in their old vigor, unless something positive can be
found to supply their place. But here is a doctrine of a most positive
kind. "The order of nature is invariably according to regular sequences."
It is a doctrine which cannot be proved, for we cannot follow all the
changes which have ever taken place in the universe; but, although
incapable of demonstration, it may be accepted until something happens to
disprove it; and it _is_ accepted, with the most absolute faith, by a
constantly increasing number of adherents.

To show how this doctrine acts in diminishing religious emotion by taking
away the opportunity for it, let me narrate an incident which really
occurred on a French line of railway in the winter of 1882. The line, on
which I had travelled a few days before, passes between a river and a
hill. The river has a rocky bed and is torrential in winter; the hill is
densely covered with a pine forest coming down to the side of the line.
The year 1882 had been the rainiest known in France for two centuries, and
the roots of the trees on the edge of this pine forest had been much
loosened by the rain. In consequence of this, two large pine-trees fell
across the railway early one morning, and soon afterwards a train
approached the spot by the dim light of early dawn. There was a curve just
before the engine reached the trees, and it had come rapidly for several
miles down a decline. The driver reversed his steam, the engine and tender
leaped over the trees, and then went over the embankment to a place within
six feet of the rapid river. The carriages remained on the line, but were
much broken. Nobody was killed; nobody was seriously injured. The
remarkable escape of the passengers was accounted for as follows by the
religious people in the neighborhood. There happened to be a priest in the
train, and at the time when the shock took place he made what is called "a
pious ejaculation." This, it was said, had saved the lives of the
passengers. In the ages of faith this explanation would have been received
without question; but the notion of natural sequences--Professor Huxley's
"order with which nothing interferes"--had obtained such firm hold on the
minds of the townsmen generally that they said the priest was trying to
make ecclesiastical capital out of an occurrence easily explicable by
natural causes. They saw nothing supernatural either in the production of
the accident or its comparative harmlessness. The trickling of much water
had denuded the roots of the trees, which fell because they could not
stand with insufficient roothold; the lives of the passengers were saved
because they did not happen to be in the most shattered carriage; and the
men on the engine escaped because they fell on soft ground, made softer
still by the rain. It was probable, too, they said, that if any beneficent
supernatural interference had taken place it would have maintained the
trees in an erect position, by preventive miracle, and so spared the
slight injuries which really were inflicted, and which, though treated
very lightly by others because there were neither deaths nor amputations,
still caused suffering to those who had to bear them.

Now if we go a little farther into the effects of this accident on the
minds of the people who shared in it, or whose friends had been imperilled
by it, we shall see very plainly the effect of the modern belief in the
regularity of natural sequences. Those who believed in supernatural
intervention would offer thanksgivings when they got home, and probably go
through some special religious thanksgiving services for many days
afterwards; those who believed in the regularity of natural sequences
would simply feel glad to have escaped, without any especial sense of
gratitude to supernatural powers. So much for the effect as far as
thanksgiving is concerned; but there is another side of the matter at
least equally important from the religious point of view,--that of prayer.
The believers in supernatural interference would probably, in all their
future railway journeys, pray to be supernaturally protected in case of
accident, as they had been in 1882; but the believers in the regularity of
natural sequences would only hope that no trees had fallen across the
line, and feel more than usually anxious after long seasons of rainy
weather. Can there be a doubt that the priest's opinion, that he had won
safety by a pious ejaculation, was highly favorable to his religious
activity afterwards, whilst the opinion of the believers in "the natural
order with which nothing interferes" was unfavorable both to prayer and
thanksgiving in connection with railway travelling?

Examples of this kind might easily be multiplied, for there is hardly any
enterprise that men undertake, however apparently unimportant, which
cannot be regarded both from the points of view of naturalism and
supernaturalism; and in every case the naturalist manner of regarding the
enterprise leads men to study the probable influence of natural causes,
whilst the supernaturalist opinion leads them to propitiate supernatural
powers. Now, although some new sense may come to be attached to the word
"religion" in future ages, so that it may come to mean scientific
thoroughness, intellectual ingenuousness, or some other virtue that may be
possessed by a pure naturalist, the word has always been understood, down
to the present time, to imply a constant dependence upon the supernatural;
and when I say that we are becoming less religious, I mean that from our
increasing tendency to refer everything to natural causes the notion of
the supernatural is much less frequently present in our minds than it was
in the minds of our forefathers. Even the clergy themselves seem to be
following the laity towards the belief in natural law, at least so far as
matter is concerned. The Bishop of Melbourne, in 1882, declined to order
prayers for rain, and gave his reason honestly, which was that material
phenomena were under the control of natural law, and would not be changed
in answer to prayer. The Bishop added that prayer should be confined to
spiritual blessings. Without disputing the soundness of this opinion, we
cannot help perceiving that if it were generally received it would put an
end to one half of the religious activity of the human race; for half the
prayers and half the thanksgivings addressed to the supernatural powers
are for material benefits only. It is possible that, in the future,
religious people will cease to pray for health, but take practical
precautions to preserve it; that they will cease to pray for prosperity,
but study the natural laws which govern the wealth of nations; that they
will no longer pray for the national fleets and armies, but see that they
are well supplied and intelligently commanded. All this and much more is
possible; but when it comes to pass the world will be less religious than
it was when men believed that every pestilence, every famine, every
defeat, was a chastisement specially, directly, and intentionally
inflicted by an angry Deity. Even now, what an immense step has been made
in this direction! In the fearful description of the pestilence at
Florence, given with so much detail by Boccaccio, he speaks of "l'ira di
Dio a punire la iniquità degli uomini con quella pestilenza;" and he
specially implies that those who sought to avoid the plague by going to
healthier places in the country deceived themselves in supposing that the
wrath of God would not follow them whithersoever they went. That is the
old belief expressing itself in prayers and humiliations. It is still
recognized officially. If the plague could occur in a town on the whole so
well cared for as modern London, the language of Boccaccio would still be
used in the official public prayers; but the active-minded practical
citizens would be thinking how to destroy the germs, how to purify air and
water. An instance of this divergence occurred after the Egyptian war of
1882. The Archbishop of York, after the battle of Tel-el-Kebir, ordered
thanksgivings to be offered in the churches, on the ground that God was in
Sir Garnet Wolseley's camp and fought with him against the Egyptians,
which was a survival of the antique idea that national deities fought
with the national armies. On this a Member of Parliament, Mr. George
Palmer, said to his constituents in a public meeting at Reading, "At the
same time I cannot agree with the prayers that have been made in churches.
Though I respect the consciences of other men, I must say that it was not
by Divine interference, but from the stuff of which our army was made and
our great ironclads, that victory was achieved." I do not quote this
opinion for any originality in itself, as there have always been men who
held that victory was a necessary result of superior military efficiency,
but I quote it as a valuable test of the change in general opinion. It is
possible that such views may have been expressed in private in all ages of
the world; but I doubt if in any age preceding ours a public man, at the
very time when he was cultivating the good graces of his electors, would
have refused to the national Deity a special share in a military triumph.
To an audience imbrued with the old conception of incessant supernatural
interferences, the doctrine that a victory was a natural result would have
sounded impious; and such an audience, if any one had ventured to say what
Mr. Palmer said, would have received him with a burst of indignation. But
Mr. Palmer knew the tendencies of the present age, and was quite correct
in thinking that he might safely express his views. His hearers were not
indignant, they were not even grave and silent, as Englishmen are when
they simply disapprove, but they listened willingly, and marked their
approbation by laughter and cheers. Even a clergyman may hold Mr.
Palmer's opinion. Soon after his speech at Reading the Rev. H. R. Haweis
said the same thing in the pulpit. "Few people," he said, "really doubt
that we have conquered the Egyptians, not because we were in the right and
they were in the wrong, but because we had the heaviest hand." The
preacher went on to say that the idea of God fighting on one side more
than another in particular battles seemed to him to be a Pagan or at most
a Jewish one. How different was the old sentiment as expressed by Macaulay
in the stirring ballad of Ivry! "We of the religion" had no doubt about
the Divine interference in the battle,

  "For our God hath crushed the tyrant, our God hath raised the slave,
   And mocked the counsel of the wise, and the valor of the brave;
   Then glory to his holy name from whom all glories are,
   And glory to our Sovereign Lord, King Henry of Navarre!"

The way in which the great mental movement of our age towards a more
complete recognition of natural order is affecting human intercourse may
be defined in a few words. If the movement were at an equal rate of
advance for all civilized people they would be perfectly agreed amongst
themselves at any one point of time, as it would be settled which events
were natural in their origin and which were due to the interposition of
Divine or diabolical agency. Living people would differ in opinion from
their predecessors, but they would not differ from each other. The change,
however, though visible and important, is not by any means uniform, so
that a guest sitting at dinner may have on his right hand a lady who sees
supernatural interferences in many things, and on his left a student of
science who is firmly convinced that there are no supernatural
interferences in the present, and that there never have been any in the
past. Private opinion, out of which public opinion slowly and gradually
forms itself, is in our time in a state of complete anarchy, because two
opposite doctrines are held loosely, and one or the other is taken up as
it happens to seem appropriate. The interpositions of Providence are
recognized or rejected according to political or personal bias. The French
Imperialists saw the Divine vengeance in the death of Gambetta, whilst in
their view the death of Napoleon III. was the natural termination of his
disease, and that of the Prince Imperial a simple accident, due to the
carelessness of his English companions. Personal bias shows itself in the
belief, often held by men occupying positions of importance, that they are
necessary, at least for a time, to fulfil the intentions of Providence.
Napoleon III. said in a moment of emotion, "So long as I am needed I am
invulnerable; but when my hour comes I shall be broken like glass!" Even
in private life a man will sometimes think, "I am so necessary to my wife
and family that Providence will not remove me," though every newspaper
reports the deaths of fathers who leave their families destitute.
Sometimes men believe that Providence takes the same view of their
enterprises that they themselves take; and when a great enterprise is
drawing near to its termination they feel assured that supernatural power
will protect them till it is quite concluded, but they believe that the
enterprises of other men are exposed to all the natural risks. When Mr.
Gifford Palgrave was wrecked in the sea of Oman, he was for some time in
an open boat, and thus describes his situation: "All depended on the
steerage, and on the balance and support afforded by the oars, and even
more still on the Providence of Him who made the deep; nor indeed could I
get myself to think that He had brought me thus far to let me drown just
at the end of my journey, and in so very unsatisfactory a way too; for had
we then gone down, what news of the event off Sowadah would ever have
reached home, or when?--so that altogether I felt confident of getting
somehow or other on shore, though by what means I did not exactly know."
Here the writer thinks of his own enterprise as deserving Divine
solicitude, but does not attach the same importance to the humbler
enterprises of the six passengers who went down with the vessel. I cannot
help thinking, too, of the poor passenger Ibraheem, who swam to the boat
and begged so piteously to be taken in, when a sailor "loosened his grasp
by main force and flung him back into the sea, where he disappeared
forever." Neither can I forget the four who imprudently plunged from the
boat and perished. We may well believe that these lost ones would have
been unable to write such a delightful and instructive book as Mr.
Palgrave's "Travels in Arabia," yet they must have had their own humble
interests in life, their own little objects and enterprises.

The calculation that Providence would spare a traveller towards the close
of a long journey may be mistaken, but it is pious; it affords an
opportunity for the exercise of devout emotion which the scientific
thinker would miss. If Mr. Herbert Spencer had been placed in the same
situation he would, no doubt, have felt the most perfect confidence that
the order of nature would not be disturbed, that even in such a turmoil of
winds and waters the laws of buoyancy and stability would be observed in
every motion of the boat to the millionth of an inch; but he would not
have considered himself likely to escape death on account of the important
nature of his undertakings. Mr. Spencer's way of judging the situation as
one of equal peril for himself and his humble companions would have been
more reasonable, but at the same time he would have lost that opportunity
for special and personal gratitude which Mr. Palgrave enjoyed when he
believed himself to be supernaturally protected. The curious inconsistency
of the common French expression, "C'est un hasard providentiel" is another
example of the present state of thought on the question. A Frenchman is
upset from a carriage, breaks no bones, and stands up, exclaiming, as he
dusts himself, "It was un hasard vraiment providentiel that I was not
lamed for life." It is plain that if his escape was providential it could
not be accidental at the same time, yet in spite of the obvious
inconsistency of his expression there is piety in his choice of an
adjective.

The distinction, as it has usually been understood hitherto, between
religious and non-religious explanations of what happens, is that the
religious person believes that events happen by supernatural direction,
and he is only thinking religiously so long as he thinks in that manner;
whilst the non-religious theory is that events happen by natural sequence,
and so long as a person thinks in this manner, his mind is acting
non-religiously, whatever may be his religious profession. "To study the
universe as it is manifested to us; to ascertain by patient inquiry the
order of the manifestations; to discover that the manifestations are
connected with one another after regular ways in time and space; and,
after repeated failures, to give up as futile the attempt to understand
the power manifested, is condemned as irreligious. And meanwhile the
character of religious is claimed by those who figure to themselves a
Creator moved by motives like their own; who conceive themselves as seeing
through His designs, and who even speak of Him as though He laid plans to
outwit the Devil!"

Yes, this is a true account of the way in which the words irreligious and
religious have always been used and there does not appear to be any
necessity for altering their signification. Every event which is
transferred, in human opinion, from supernatural to natural action is
transferred from the domain of religion to that of science; and it is
because such transferrences have been so frequent in our time that we are
becoming so much less religious than our forefathers were. In how many
things is the modern man perfectly irreligious! He is so in everything
that relates to applied science, to steam, telegraphy, photography,
metallurgy, agriculture, manufactures. He has not the slightest belief in
spiritual intervention, either for or against him, in these material
processes. He is beginning to be equally irreligious in government.
Modern politicians have been accused of thinking that God cannot govern,
but that is not a true account of their opinion. What they really think is
that government is an application of science to the direction of national
life, in which no invisible powers will either thwart a ruler in that
which he does wisely, or shield him from the evil consequences of his
errors.

But though we are less religious than our ancestors because we believe
less in the interferences of the supernatural, do we deserve censure for
our way of understanding the world? Certainly not. Was Nikias a proper
object of praise because the eclipse seen by him at Syracuse seemed a
warning from the gods; and was Wolseley a proper object of blame because
the comet seen by him on the Egyptian plain was without a Divine message?
Both these opinions are quite outside of merit, although the older opinion
was in the highest degree religious, and the later one is not religious in
the least. Such changes simply indicate a gradual revolution in man's
conception of the universe, which is the result of more accurate
knowledge. So why not accept the fact, why not admit that we have really
become less religious? Possibly we have a compensation, a gain equivalent
to our loss. If the gods do not speak to us by signs in the heavens; if
the entrails of victims and the flight of birds no longer tell us when to
march to battle and where to remain inactive in our tents; if the oracle
is silent at Delos, and the ark lost to Jerusalem; if we are pilgrims to
no shrine; if we drink of no sacred fountain and plunge into no holy
stream; if all the special sanctities once reverenced by humanity are
unable any longer to awaken our dead enthusiasm, have we gained nothing in
exchange for the many religious excitements that we have lost? Yes, we
have gained a keener interest in the natural order, and a knowledge of it
at once more accurate and more extensive, a gain that Greek and Jew might
well have envied us, and which a few of their keener spirits most ardently
desired. Our passion for natural knowledge is not a devout emotion, and
therefore it is not religious; but it is a noble and a fruitful passion
nevertheless, and by it our eyes are opened. The good Saint Bernard had
his own saintly qualities; but for us the qualities of a De Saussure are
not without their worth. Saint Bernard, in the perfection of ancient
piety, travelling a whole day by the lake of Geneva without seeing it, too
much absorbed by devout meditation to perceive anything terrestrial, was
blinded by his piety, and might with equal profit have stayed in his
monastic cell. De Saussure was a man of our own time. Never, in his
writings, do you meet with any allusion to supernatural interferences
(except once or twice in pity for popular superstitions); but fancy De
Saussure passing the lake of Geneva, or any other work of nature, without
seeing it! His life was spent in the continual study of the natural world;
and this study was to him so vigorous an exercise for the mind, and so
strict a discipline, that he found in it a means of moral and even of
physical improvement. There is no trace in his writings of what is called
devout emotion, but the bright light of intelligent admiration illumines
every page; and when he came to die, if he could not look back, like
Saint Bernard, upon what is especially supposed to be a religious life, he
could look back upon many years wisely and well spent in the study of that
nature of which Saint Bernard scarcely knew more than the mule that
carried him.




ESSAY XVI.

ON AN UNRECOGNIZED FORM OF UNTRUTH.


In the art of painting there are two opposite ways of dealing with natural
color. It may be intensified, or it may be translated by tints of inferior
chromatic force. In either case the picture may be perfectly harmonious,
provided only that the same principle of interpretation be consistently
followed throughout.

The first time that I became acquainted with the first of these two
methods of interpretation was in my youth, when I met with a Scottish
painter who has since become eminent in his art. He was painting studies
from nature; and I noticed that whenever in the natural object there was a
trace of dull gold, as in some lichen, he made it a brighter gold, and
whenever there was a little rusty red he made it a more vivid red. So it
was with every other tint. His eye seemed to become excited by every hue,
and he translated it by one of greater intensity and power.

Now that is a kind of exaggeration which is very commonly recognized as a
departure from the sober truth. People complain that the sky is too blue,
the fields too green, and so on.

Afterwards I saw French painters at work, and I noticed that they (in
those days) interpreted natural color by an intentional lowering of the
chromatic force. When they had to deal with the splendors of autumnal
woods against a blue sky they interpreted the azure by a blue-gray, and
the flaming gold by a dull russet. They even refused themselves the more
quiet brightness of an ordinary wheat-field, and translated the yellow of
the wheat by an earthy brown.

Unlike falsehood by exaggeration, this other kind of falsehood (by
diminution) is very seldom recognized as a departure from the truth. Such
coloring as this French coloring excited but few protests, and indeed was
often praised for being "modest" and "subdued."

Both systems are equally permissible in the fine arts, if consistently
followed, because in art the unity and harmony of the work are of greater
importance than the exact imitation of nature. It is not as an art-critic
that I should have any fault to find with a well-understood and thoroughly
consistent conventionalism in the interpretation of nature; but the two
kinds of falsity we have noticed are constantly found in action outside of
the fine arts, and yet only one of them is recognized in its true
character, the other being esteemed as a proof of modesty and moderation.

The general opinion, in our own country, condemns falsehood by
exaggeration, but it does not blame falsehood by diminution. Overstatement
is regarded as a vice, and understatement as a sort of modest virtue,
whilst in fact they are both untruthful, exactly in the degree of their
departure from perfect accuracy.

If a man states his income as being larger than it really is, if he adopts
a degree of ostentation which (though he may be able to pay for it)
conveys the idea of more ample means than he really possesses, and if we
find out afterwards what his income actually is, we condemn him as an
untruthful person; but lying by diminution with reference to money matters
is looked upon simply as modesty.

I remember a most respectable English family who had this modesty in
perfection. It was their great pleasure to represent themselves as being
much less rich than they really were. Whenever they heard of anybody with
moderate or even narrow means, they pretended to think that he had quite
an ample income. If you mentioned a man with a family, struggling on a
pittance, they would say he was "very comfortably provided for," and if
you spoke of another whose expenses were the ordinary expenses of
gentlemen, they wondered by what inventions of extravagance he could get
through so much money. They themselves pretended to spend much less than
they really spent, and they always affected astonishment when they heard
how much it cost other people to live exactly in their own way. They
considered that this was modesty; but was it not just as untruthful as the
commoner vice of assuming a style more showy than the means warrant?

In France and Italy the departure from the truth is almost invariably in
the direction of overstatement, unless the speaker has some distinct
purpose to serve by adopting the opposite method, as when he desires to
depreciate the importance of an enemy. In England people habitually
understate, and the remarkable thing is that they believe themselves to be
strictly truthful in doing so. The word "lying" is too harsh a term to be
applied either to the English or the Continental habit in this matter; but
it is quite fair to say that both of them miss the truth, one in falling
short of it, the other in going beyond it.

An English family has seen the Alps for the first time. A young lady says
Switzerland is "nice;" a young gentleman has decided that it is "jolly."
This is what the habit of understatement may bring us down to,--absolute
inadequacy. The Alps are not "nice," and they are not "jolly;" far more
powerful adjectives are only the precise truth in this instance. The Alps
are stupendous, overwhelming, magnificent, sublime. A Frenchman in similar
circumstances will be embarrassed, not by any timidity about using a
sufficiently forcible expression, but because he is eager to exaggerate;
and one scarcely knows how to exaggerate the tremendous grandeur of the
finest Alpine scenery. He will have recourse to eloquent phraseology, to
loudness of voice, and finally, when he feels that these are still
inadequate, he will employ energetic gesture. I met a Frenchman who tried
to make me comprehend how many English people there were at Cannes in
winter. "Il y en a--des Anglais--il y en a,"--then he hesitated, whilst
seeking for an adequate expression. At last, throwing out both his arms,
he cried, "_Il y en a plus qu'en Angleterre!_"

The English love of understatement is even more visible in moral than in
material things. If an Englishman has to describe any person or action
that is particularly admirable on moral grounds, he will generally
renounce the attempt to be true, and substitute for the high and
inspiring truth some quiet little conventional expression that will
deliver him from what he most dreads,--the appearance of any noble
enthusiasm. It does not occur to him that this inadequacy, this
insufficiency of expression, is one of the forms of untruth; that to
describe noble and admirable conduct in commonplace and non-appreciative
language is to pay tribute of a kind especially acceptable to the Father
of Lies. If we suppose the existence of a modern Mephistopheles watching
the people of our own time and pleased with every kind of moral evil, we
may readily imagine how gratified he must be to observe the moral
indifference which uses exactly the same terms for ordinary and heroic
virtue, which never rises with the occasion, and which always seems to
take it for granted that there are neither noble natures nor high purposes
in the world. The dead mediocrity of common talk, too timid and too
indolent for any expression equivalent either to the glory of external
nature or the intellectual and moral grandeur of great and excellent men,
has driven many of our best minds from conversation into literature,
because in literature it is not thought extraordinary for a man to express
himself with a degree of force and clearness equivalent to the energy of
his feelings, the accuracy of his knowledge, and the importance of his
subject. The habit of using inadequate expression in conversation has led
to the strange result that if an Englishman has any power of thought, any
living interest in the great problems of human destiny, you will know
hardly anything of the real action of his mind unless he becomes an
author. He dares not express any high feelings in conversation, because
he dreads what Stuart Mill called the "sneering depreciation" of them; and
if such feelings are strong enough in him to make expression an imperative
want, he has to utter them on paper. By a strange result of
conventionalism, a man is admired for using language of the utmost
clearness and force in literature, whilst if he talked as vigorously as he
wrote (except, perhaps, in extreme privacy and even secrecy with one or
two confidential companions) he would be looked upon as scarcely
civilized. This may be one of the reasons why English literature,
including the periodical, is so abundant in quantity and so full of
energy. It is a mental outlet, a _dérivatif_.

The kind of untruthfulness which may be called _untruthfulness by
inadequacy_ causes many strong and earnest minds to keep aloof from
general society, which seems to them insipid. They find frank and clear
expression in books, they find it even in newspapers and reviews, but they
do not find it in social intercourse. This deficiency drives many of the
more intelligent of our countrymen into the strange and perfectly
unnatural position of receiving ideas almost exclusively through the
medium of print, and of communicating them only by writing. I remember an
Englishman of great learning and ability who lived almost entirely in that
manner. He received his ideas through books and the learned journals, and
whenever any thought occurred to him he wrote it immediately on a slip of
paper. In society he was extremely absent, and when he spoke it was in an
apologetic and timidly suggestive manner, as if he were always afraid
that what he had to say might not be interesting to the hearer, or might
even appear objectionable, and as if he were quite ready to withdraw it.
He was far too anxious to be well-behaved ever to venture on any forcible
expression of opinion or to utter any noble sentiment; and yet his
convictions on all important subjects were very serious, and had been
arrived at after deep thought, and he was capable of real elevation of
mind. His writings are the strongest possible contrast to his oral
expression of himself. They are bold in opinion, very clear and decided in
statement, and full of well-ascertained knowledge.




ESSAY XVII.

ON A REMARKABLE ENGLISH PECULIARITY.


In De Tocqueville's admirable book on "Democracy in America" there is an
interesting chapter on the behavior of Englishmen to each other when they
meet in a foreign country:--

    "Two Englishmen meet by chance at the antipodes; they are surrounded
    by foreigners whose language and mode of life are hardly known to
    them.

    "These two men begin by studying each other very curiously and with a
    kind of secret uneasiness; they then turn away, or, if they meet, they
    are careful to speak only with a constrained and absent air, and to
    say things of little importance.

    "And yet they know nothing of each other; they have never met, and
    suppose each other to be perfectly honorable. Why, then, do they take
    such pains to avoid intercourse?"

De Tocqueville was a very close observer, and I hardly know a single
instance in which his faculty of observation shows itself in greater
perfection. In his terse style of writing every word tells; and even in my
translation, unavoidably inferior to the original, you actually see the
two Englishmen and the minute details of their behavior.

Let me now introduce the reader to a little scene at a foreign _table
d'hôte_, as described with great skill and truth by a well-known English
novelist, Miss Betham-Edwards:--

    "The time, September; the scene, a _table d'hôte_ dinner in a
    much-frequented French town. For the most part nothing can be more
    prosaic than these daily assemblies of English tourists bound for
    Switzerland and the South, and a slight sprinkling of foreigners, the
    two elements seldom or never blending; a visitant from another planet
    might, indeed, suppose that between English and French-speaking people
    lay such a gulf as divides the blond New Englander from the swarth
    African, so icy the distance, so unbroken the reserve. Nor is there
    anything like cordiality between the English themselves. Our imaginary
    visitant from Jupiter would here find matter for wonder also, and
    would ask himself the reason of this freezing reticence among the
    English fellowship. What deadly feud of blood, caste, or religion
    could thus keep them apart? Whilst the little knot of Gallic
    travellers at the farther end of the table straightway fall into
    friendliest talk, the long rows of Britons of both sexes and all ages
    speak only in subdued voices and to the members of their own family."

Next, let me give an account of a personal experience in a Parisian hotel.
It was a little, unpretending establishment that I liked for its quiet and
for the honest cookery. There was a _table d'hôte_, frequented by a few
French people, generally from the provinces, and once there came some
English visitors who had found out the merits of the little place. It
happened that I had been on the Continent a long time without revisiting
England, so when my fellow-countrymen arrived I had foolish feelings of
pleasure on finding myself amongst them, and spoke to them in our common
English tongue. The effect of this bold experiment was extremely curious,
and to me, at the time, almost inexplicable, as I had forgotten that
chapter by De Tocqueville. The new-comers were two or three young men and
one in middle life. The young men seemed to be reserved more from timidity
than pride. They were quite startled and frightened when spoken to, and
made answer with grave brevity, as if apprehensive of committing
themselves to some compromising statement. With an audacity acquired by
habits of intercourse with foreigners, I spoke to the older Englishman.
His way of putting me down would have been a charming study for a
novelist. His manner resembled nothing so much as that of a dignified
English minister,--Mr. Gladstone for example, when he is questioned in the
House by some young and presumptuous member of the Opposition. A few brief
words were vouchsafed to me, accompanied by an expression of countenance
which, if not positively stern, was intentionally divested of everything
like interest or sympathy. It then began to dawn upon me that perhaps this
Englishman was conscious of some august social superiority; that he might
even know a lord; and I thought, "If he does really know a lord we are
very likely to hear his lordship's name." My expectation was not fulfilled
to the letter, but it was quite fulfilled in spirit; for in talking to a
Frenchman (for me to hear) our Englishman shortly boasted that he knew an
English duchess, giving her name and place of abode. "One day when I was
at ---- House I said to the Duchess of ----," and he repeated what he had
said to Her Grace; but it would have no interest for the reader, as it
probably had none for the great lady herself. Shade of Thackeray! why
wast thou not there to add a paragraph to the "Book of Snobs"?

The next day came another Englishman of about fifty, who distinguished
himself in another way. He did not know a duchess, or, if he did, we were
not informed of his good fortune; but he assumed a wonderful air of
superiority to his temporary surroundings, that filled me, I must say,
with the deepest respect and awe. The impression he desired to produce was
that he had never before been in so poor a little place, and that our
society was far beneath what he was accustomed to. He criticised things
disdainfully, and when I ventured to speak to him he condescended, it is
true, to enter into conversation, but in a manner that seemed to say, "Who
and what are you that you dare to speak to a gentleman like me, who am, as
you must perceive, a person of wealth and consideration?"

This account of our English visitors is certainly not exaggerated by any
excessive sensitiveness on my part. Paris is not the Desert; and one who
has known it for thirty years is not dependent for society on a chance
arrival from beyond the sea. For me these Englishmen were but actors in a
play, and perhaps they afforded me more amusement with their own peculiar
manners than if they had been pleasant and amiable. One result, however,
was inevitable. I had been full of kindly feeling towards my
fellow-countrymen when they came, but this soon gave place to
indifference; and their departure was rather a relief. When they had left
Paris, there arrived a rich French widow from the south with her son and
a priest, who seemed to be tutor and chaplain. The three lived at our
_table d'hôte_; and we found them most agreeable, always ready to take
their share in conversation, and, although far too well-bred to commit the
slightest infraction of the best French social usages, either through
ignorance or carelessness, they were at the same time perfectly open and
easy in their manners. They set up no pretensions, they gave themselves no
airs, and when they returned to their own southern sunshine we felt their
departure as a loss.

The foreign idea of social intercourse under such conditions (that is, of
intercourse between strangers who are thrown together accidentally) is
simply that it is better to pass an hour agreeably than in dreary
isolation. People may not have much to say that is of any profound
interest, but they enjoy the free play of the mind; and it sometimes
happens, in touching on all sorts of subjects, that unexpected lights are
thrown upon them. Some of the most interesting conversations I have ever
heard have taken place at foreign _tables d'hôte_, between people who had
probably never met before and who would separate forever in a week. If by
accident they meet again, such acquaintances recognize each other by a
bow, but there is none of that intrusiveness which the Englishman so
greatly dreads.

Besides these transient acquaintanceships which, however brief, are by no
means without their value to one's experience and culture, the foreign way
of understanding a _table d'hôte_ includes the daily and habitual meeting
of regular subscribers, a meeting looked forward to with pleasure as a
break in the labors of the day, or a mental refreshment when they are
over. Nothing affords such relief from the pressure of work as a free and
animated conversation on other subjects. Of this more permanent kind of
_table d'hôte_, Mr. Lewes gave a lively description in his biography of
Goethe:--

    "The English student, clerk, or bachelor, who dines at an
    eating-house, chop-house, or hotel, goes there simply to get his
    dinner, and perhaps look at the 'Times.' Of the other diners he knows
    nothing, cares little. It is rare that a word is interchanged between
    him and his neighbor. Quite otherwise in Germany. There the same
    society is generally to be found at the same table. The _table d'hôte_
    is composed of a circle of _habitués_, varied by occasional visitors
    who in time become, perhaps, members of the circle. _Even with
    strangers conversation is freely interchanged_; and in a little while
    friendships are formed over these dinner-tables, according as natural
    tastes and likings assimilate, which, extending beyond the mere hour
    of dinner, are carried into the current of life. Germans do not rise
    so hastily from the table as we, for time with them is not so
    precious; life is not so crowded; time can be found for quiet
    after-dinner talk. The cigars and coffee, which appear before the
    cloth is removed, keep the company together; and in that state of
    suffused comfort which quiet digestion creates, they hear without
    anger the opinions of antagonists."

In this account of German habits we see the repast made use of as an
opportunity for human intercourse, which the Englishman avoids except with
persons already known to him or known to a private host. The reader has
noticed the line I have italicized,--"Even with strangers conversation is
freely interchanged." The consequence is that the stranger does not feel
himself to be isolated, and if he is not an Englishman he does not take
offence at being treated like an intelligent human being, but readily
accepts the welcome that is offered to him.

The English peculiarity in this respect does not, however, consist so much
in avoiding intercourse with foreigners as in shunning other English
people. It is true that in the description of a _table d'hôte_ by Miss
Betham-Edwards, the English and foreign elements are represented as
separated by an icy distance, and the description is strikingly accurate;
but this shyness and timidity as regards foreigners may be sufficiently
accounted for by want of skill and ease in speaking their language. Most
English people of education know a little French and German, but few speak
those languages freely, fluently, and correctly. When it does happen that
an Englishman has mastered a foreign tongue, he will generally talk more
readily and unreservedly with a foreigner than with one of his own
countrymen. This is the notable thing, that if English people do not
really dislike and distrust one another, if there is not really "a deadly
feud of blood, caste, or religion" to separate them, they expose
themselves to the accusation of John Stuart Mill, that "everybody acts as
if everybody else was either an enemy or a bore."

This English avoidance of English people is so remarkable and exceptional
a characteristic that it could not but greatly interest and exercise so
observant a mind as that of De Tocqueville. We have seen how accurately he
noticed it; how exactly the conduct of shy Englishmen had fixed itself in
his memory. Let us now see how he accounted for it.

Is it a mark of aristocracy? Is it because our race is more aristocratic
than other races?

De Tocqueville's theory was, that it is _not_ the mark of an aristocratic
society, because, in a society classed by birth, although people of
different castes hold little communication with each other, they talk
easily when they meet, without either fearing or desiring social fusion.
"Their intercourse is not founded on equality, but it is free from
constraint."

This view of the subject is confirmed by all that I know, through personal
tradition, of the really aristocratic time in France that preceded the
Revolution. The old-fashioned facility and directness of communication
between ranks that were separated by wide social distances would surprise
and almost scandalize a modern aspirant to false aristocracy, who has
assumed the _de_, and makes up in _morgue_ what is wanting to him in
antiquity of descent. I believe, too, that when England was a far more
aristocratic country than it is at present, manners were less distant and
not so cold and suspicious.

If the blame is not to be laid on the spirit of aristocracy, what is the
real cause of the indisputable fact that an Englishman avoids an
Englishman? De Tocqueville believed that the cause was to be found in the
uncertainty of a transition state from aristocratic to plutocratic ideas;
that there is still the notion of a strict classification; and yet that
this classification is no longer determined by blood, but by money, which
has taken its place, so that although the ranks exist still, as if the
country were really aristocratic, it is not easy to see clearly, and at
the first glance, who occupies them. Hence there is a _guerre sourde_
between all the citizens. Some try by a thousand artifices to edge their
way in reality or apparently amongst those above them; others fight
without ceasing to repel the usurpers of their rights; or rather, the same
person does both; and whilst he struggles to introduce himself into the
upper region he perpetually endeavors to put down aspirants who are still
beneath him.

"The pride of aristocracy," said De Tocqueville, "being still very great
with the English, and the limits of aristocracy having become doubtful,
every one fears that he may be surprised at any moment into undesirable
familiarity. Not being able to judge at first sight of the social position
of those they meet, the English prudently avoid contact. They fear, in
rendering little services, to form in spite of themselves an ill-assorted
friendship; they dread receiving attention from others; and they withdraw
themselves from the indiscreet gratitude of an unknown fellow-countryman
as carefully as they would avoid his hatred."

This, no doubt, is the true explanation, but something may be added to it.
An Englishman dreads acquaintances from the apprehension that they may end
by coming to his house; a Frenchman is perfectly at his ease on that point
by reason of the greater discretion of French habits. It is perfectly
understood, in France, that you may meet a man at a _café_ for years, and
talk to him with the utmost freedom, and yet he will not come near your
private residence unless you ask him; and when he meets you in the street
he will not stop you, but will simply lift his hat,--a customary
salutation from all who know your name, which does not compromise you in
any way. It might perhaps be an exaggeration to say that in France there
is absolutely no struggling after a higher social position by means of
acquaintances, but there is certainly very little of it. The great
majority of French people live in the most serene indifference as regards
those who are a little above them socially. They hardly even know their
titles; and when they do know them they do not care about them in the
least.[18]

It may not be surprising that the conduct of Americans should differ from
that of Englishmen, as Americans have no titles; but if they have not
titles they have vast inequalities of wealth, and Englishmen can be
repellent without titles. Yet, in spite of pecuniary differences between
Americans, and notwithstanding the English blood in their veins, they do
not avoid one another. "If they meet by accident," says De Tocqueville,
"they neither seek nor avoid one another; their way of meeting is natural,
frank, and open; it is evident that they hope or fear scarcely anything
from each other, and that they neither try to exhibit nor to conceal the
station they occupy. If their manner is often cold and serious, it is
never either haughty or stiff; and when they do not speak it is because
they are not in the humor for conversation, and not because they believe
it their interest to be silent. In a foreign country two Americans are
friends at once, simply because they are Americans. They are separated by
no prejudice, and their common country draws them together. In the case of
two Englishmen the same blood is not enough; there must be also identity
of rank."

The English habit strikes foreigners by contrast, and it strikes
Englishmen in the same way when they have lived much in foreign countries.
Charles Lever had lived abroad, and was evidently as much struck by this
as De Tocqueville himself. Many readers will remember his brilliant story,
"That Boy of Norcott's," and how the young hero, after finding himself
delightfully at ease with a society of noble Hungarians, at the Schloss
Hunyadi, is suddenly chilled and alarmed by the intelligence that an
English lord is expected. "When they shall see," he says, "how my titled
countryman will treat me,--the distance at which he will hold me, and the
measured firmness with which he will repel, not my familiarities, for I
should not dare them, _but simply the ease of my manner_,--the foreigners
will be driven to regard me as some ignoble upstart who has no pretension
whatever to be amongst them."

Lever also noted that a foreigner would have had a better chance of civil
treatment than an Englishman. "In my father's house I had often had
occasion to remark that while Englishmen freely admitted the advances of a
foreigner and accepted his acquaintance with a courteous readiness, with
each other they maintained a cold and studied reserve, as though no
difference of place or circumstance was to obliterate that insular code
which defines class, and limits each man to the exact rank he belongs to."

These readings and experiences, and many others too long to quote or
narrate, have led me to the conclusion that it is scarcely possible to
attempt any other manner with English people than that which the very
peculiar and exceptional state of national feeling appears to authorize.
The reason is that in the present state of feeling the innovator is almost
sure to be misunderstood. He may be perfectly contented with his own
social position; his mind may be utterly devoid of any desire to raise
himself in society; the extent of his present wishes may be to wile away
the tedium of a journey or a repast with a little intelligent
conversation; yet if he breaks down the barrier of English reserve he is
likely to be taken for a pushing and intrusive person who is eager to lift
himself in the world. Every friendly expression on his part, even in a
look or the tone of his voice, "simply the ease of his manner," may be
repelled as an impertinence. In the face of such a probable
misinterpretation one feels that it is hardly possible to be too distant
or too cold. When two men meet it is the colder and more reserved man who
always has the advantage. He is the rock; the other is the wave that comes
against the rock and falls shattered at its foot.

It would be wrong to conclude this Essay without a word of reference to
the exceptional Englishman who can pass an hour intelligently with a
stranger, and is not constantly preoccupied with the idea that the
stranger is plotting how to make some ulterior use of him. Such Englishmen
are usually men of ripe experience, who have travelled much and seen much
of the world, so that they have lost our insular distrust. I have met with
a few of them,--they are not very numerous,--and I wish that I could meet
the same fellow-countrymen by some happy accident again. There is nothing
stranger in life than those very short friendships that are formed in an
hour between two people born to understand each other, and cut short
forever the next day, or the next week, by an inevitable separation.[19]




ESSAY XVIII.

OF GENTEEL IGNORANCE.


All virtue has its negative as well as its positive side, and every ideal
includes not having as well as having. Gentility, for those who aspire to
it and value it, is an ideal condition of humanity, a superior state which
is maintained by selection amongst the things that life offers to a man
who has the power to choose. He is judged by his selection. The genteel
person selects in his own way, not only amongst things that can be seen
and handled, such as the material adjuncts of a high state of
civilization, but also amongst the things of the mind, including all the
varieties of knowledge.

That a selection of this kind should be one of the marks of gentility is
in itself no more than a natural consequence of the idealizing process as
we see it continually exercised in the fine arts. Every work of fine art
is a result of selection. The artist does not give us the natural truth as
it is, but he purposely omits very much of it, and alters that which he
recognizes. The genteel person is himself a work of art, and, as such,
contains only partial truth.

This is the central fact about gentility, that it is a narrow ideal,
impoverishing the mind by the rejection of truth as much as it adorns it
by elegance; and it is for this reason that gentility is disliked and
refused by all powerful and inquiring intellects. They look upon it as a
mental condition with which they have nothing to do, and they pursue their
labors without the slightest deference or condescension to it. They may,
however, profitably study it as one of the states of human life, and a
state towards which a certain portion of humanity, aided by wealth,
appears to tend inevitably.

The misfortune of the genteel mind is that it is carried by its own
idealism so far away from the truth of nature that it becomes divorced
from fact and unable to see the movement of the actual world; so that
genteel people, with their narrow and erroneous ideas, are sure to find
themselves thrust aside by men of robust intelligence, who are not
genteel, but who have a stronger grip upon reality. There is,
consequently, a pathetic element in gentility, with its fallacious hopes,
its certain disappointments, so easily foreseen by all whom it has not
blinded, and its immense, its amazing, its ever invincible ignorance.

There is not a country in Europe more favorable than France for the study
of the genteel condition of mind. There you have it in its perfection in
the class _qui n'a rien appris et rien oublié_, and in the numerous
aspirants to social position who desire to mix themselves and become
confounded with that class. It has been in the highest degree fashionable,
since the establishment of the Republic, to be ignorant of the real course
of events. In spite of overwhelming evidence to the contrary, genteel
people either really believed or universally professed to believe during
the life-time of the Count de Chambord, that his restoration was not only
probable but imminent. No belief could have been more destitute of
foundation in fact; and if genteel people had not been compelled by
gentility to shut their eyes against what was obvious to everybody else,
they might have ascertained the truth with the utmost facility. The truth
was simply this, that the country was going away further and further from
divine right every day, and from every sort of real monarchy, or one-man
government, and was becoming more and more attached to representative
institutions and an elective system everywhere; and what made this truth
glaringly evident was not only the steadily increasing number of
republican elections, but the repeated return to power of the very
ministers whom the party of divine right most bitterly execrated. The same
class of genteel French people affected to believe that the end of the
temporal power of the Papacy by the foundation of the Italian kingdom was
but a temporary crisis, probably of short duration; though the process
which had brought the Papacy to nothing as a temporal sovereignty had been
slow, gradual, and natural,--the progressive enfeeblement of a theocracy
unable to defend itself against its own subjects, and dependent on foreign
soldiers for every hour of its artificial survival. Such is genteel
ignorance in political matters. It is a polite shutting of the eyes
against all facts and tendencies that are disagreeable to people of
fashion. It is unpleasant to people of fashion to be told that the France
of the future is more likely to be governed by men of business than by
kings and cardinals; it is disagreeable to them to hear that the Pope is
not to do what he likes with the Roman people; and so, to please them, we
are to pretend that we do not understand the course of recent history,
which is obvious to everybody who thinks. The course of events has always
proved the blindness of the genteel world, its incapacity to understand
the present and forecast the future; yet still it goes on in the old way,
shutting its eyes resolutely against surrounding facts, and making
predictions that are sure to be falsified by the event. Such a state of
mind is unintelligent to the last degree, but then it is genteel; and
there is always, in every country, a large class of persons who would
rather be gentlemanly than wise.

In religion, genteel ignorance is not less remarkable than in politics.
Here the mark of gentility is to ignore the unfashionable churches, and
generally to underestimate all those forces of opinion that are not on the
side of the particular form of orthodoxy which is professed by the upper
class. In France it is one of the marks of high breeding not to know
anything about Protestantism. The fact that there are such people as
Protestants is admitted, and it is believed that some of them are decent
and respectable people in their line of life, who may follow an erroneous
religion with an assiduity praiseworthy in itself, but the nature of their
opinions is not known, and it is thought better not to inquire into them.

In England the gentry know hardly anything about Dissenters. As to the
organization of dissenting communities, nobody ever hears of any of them
having bishops, and so it is supposed that they must have some sort of
democratic system. Genteel knowledge of dissenting faith and practice is
confined to a very few points,--that Unitarians do not believe in the
Trinity, that Baptists have some unusual practice about baptism, and that
Methodists are fond of singing hymns. This is all, and more than enough;
as it is inconceivable that an aristocratic person can have anything to do
with Dissent, unless he wants the Nonconformist vote in politics. If
Dissenters are to be spoken of at all, it should be in a condescending
tone, as good people in their way, who may be decent members of the middle
and lower classes, of some use in withstanding the tide of infidelity.

I remember a lady who condemned some eminent man as an atheist, on which I
ventured to object that he was a deist only. "It is exactly the same
thing," she replied. Being at that time young and argumentative, I
maintained that there existed a distinction: that a deist believed in God,
and an atheist had not that belief. "That is of no consequence," she
rejoined; "what concerns us is that we should know as little as possible
about such people." When this dialogue took place the lady seemed to me
unreasonable and unjust, but now I perceive that she was genteel. She
desired to keep her soul pure from the knowledge which gentility did not
recognize; she wanted to know nothing about the shades and colors of
heresy.

There is a delightful touch of determined ignorance in the answer of the
Russian prelates to Mr. William Palmer, who went to Russia in 1840 with a
view to bring about a recognition of Anglicanism by Oriental orthodoxy.
In substance, according to Cardinal Newman, it amounted to this: "We know
of no true Church besides our own. We are the only Church in the world.
The Latins are heretics, or all but heretics; you are worse; _we do not
even know your name_." It would be difficult to excel this last touch; it
is the perfection of uncontaminated orthodoxy, of the pure Russian
religious _comme il faut_. We, the holy, the undefiled, the separate from
heretics and from those lost ones, worse than heretics, into whose
aberrations we never inquire, "_we do not even know your name_."

Of all examples of genteel ignorance, there are none more frequent than
the ignorance of those necessities which are occasioned by a limited
income. I am not, at present, alluding to downright poverty. It is genteel
to be aware that the poor exist; it is genteel, even, to have poor people
of one's own to pet and patronize; and it is pleasant to be kind to such
poor people when they receive our kindness in a properly submissive
spirit, with a due sense of the immense distance between us, and read the
tracts we give them, and listen respectfully to our advice. It is genteel
to have to do with poor people in this way, and even to know something
about them; the real genteel ignorance consists in not recognizing the
existence of those impediments that are familiar to people of limited
means. "I cannot understand," said an English lady, "why people complain
about the difficulties of housekeeping. Such difficulties may almost
always be included under one head,--insufficiency of servants; people have
only to take more servants, and the difficulties disappear." Of course
the cost of maintaining a troup of domestics is too trifling to be taken
into consideration. A French lady, in my hearing, asked what fortune had
such a family. The answer was simple and decided, they had no fortune at
all. "No fortune at all! then how can they possibly live? How can people
live who have no fortune?" This lady's genteel ignorance was enlightened
by the explanation that when there is no fortune in a family it is
generally supported by the labor of one or more of its members. "I cannot
understand," said a rich Englishman to one of my friends, "why men are so
imprudent as to allow themselves to sink into money embarrassments. There
is a simple rule that I follow myself, and that I have always found a
great safeguard,--it is, _never to let one's balance at the banker's fall
below five thousand pounds_. By strictly adhering to this rule one is
always sure to be able to meet any unexpected and immediate necessity."
Why, indeed, do we not all follow a rule so evidently wise? It may be
especially recommended to struggling professional men with large families.
If only they can be persuaded to act upon it they will find it an
unspeakable relief from anxiety, and the present volume will not have been
penned in vain.

Genteel ignorance of pecuniary difficulties is conspicuous in the case of
amusements. It is supposed, if you are inclined to amuse yourself in a
certain limited way, that you are stupid for not doing it on a much more
expensive scale. Charles Lever wrote a charming paper for one of the early
numbers of the "Cornhill Magazine," in which he gave an account of the
dangers and difficulties he had encountered in riding and boating, simply
because he had set limits to his expenditure on those pastimes, an economy
that seemed unaccountably foolish to his genteel acquaintances. "Lever
will ride such screws! Why won't he give a proper price for a horse? It's
the stupidest thing in the world to be under-horsed; and bad economy
besides." These remarks, Lever said, were not sarcasms on his skill or
sneers at his horsemanship, but they were far worse, they were harsh
judgments on himself expressed in a manner that made reply impossible. So
with his boating. Lever had a passion for boating, for that real boating
which is perfectly distinct from yachting and incomparably less costly;
but richer acquaintances insisted on the superior advantages of the more
expensive amusement. "These cockle-shells, sir, must go over; they have no
bearings, they lee over, and there you are,--you fill and go down. Have a
good decked boat,--I should say five-and-thirty or forty tons; _get a
clever skipper and a lively crew_." Is not this exactly like the lady who
thought people stupid for not having an adequate establishment of
servants?

Another form of genteel ignorance consists in being so completely blinded
by conventionalism as not to be able to perceive the essential identity of
two modes of life or habits of action when one of them happens to be in
what is called "good form," whilst the other is not accepted by polite
society. My own tastes and pursuits have often led me to do things for the
sake of study or pleasure which in reality differ but very slightly from
what genteel people often do; yet, at the same time, this slight
difference is sufficient to prevent them from seeing any resemblance
whatever between my practice and theirs. When a young man, I found a
wooden hut extremely convenient for painting from nature, and when at a
distance from other lodging I slept in it. This was unfashionable; and
genteel people expressed much wonder at it, being especially surprised
that I could be so imprudent as to risk health by sleeping in a little
wooden house. Conventionalism made them perfectly ignorant of the fact
that they occasionally slept in little wooden houses themselves. A railway
carriage is simply a wooden hut on wheels, generally very ill-ventilated,
and presenting the alternative of foul air or a strong draught, with
vibration that makes sleep difficult to some and to others absolutely
impossible. I have passed many nights in those public wooden huts on
wheels, but have never slept in them so pleasantly as in my own private
one.[20] Genteel people also use wooden dwellings that float on water. A
yacht's cabin is nothing but a hut of a peculiar shape with its own
special inconveniences. On land a hut will remain steady; at sea it
inclines in every direction, and is tossed about like Gulliver's large
box. An Italian nobleman who liked travel, but had no taste for dirty
Southern inns, had four vans that formed a square at night, with a little
courtyard in the middle that was covered with canvas and served as a
spacious dining-room. The arrangement was excellent, but he was
considered hopelessly eccentric; yet how slight was the difference between
his vans and a train of saloon carriages for the railway! He simply had
saloon carriages that were adapted for common roads.

It is difficult to see what advantage there can be in genteel ignorance to
compensate for its evident disadvantages. Not to be acquainted with
unfashionable opinions, not to be able to imagine unfashionable
necessities, not to be able to perceive the real likeness between
fashionable and unfashionable modes of life on account of some external
and superficial difference, is like living in a house with closed
shutters. Surely a man, or a woman either, might have as good manners, and
be as highly civilized in all respects, with accurate notions of things as
with a head full of illusions. To understand the world as it really is, to
see the direction in which humanity is travelling, ought to be the purpose
of every strong and healthy intellect, even though such knowledge may take
it out of gentility altogether.

The effect of genteel ignorance on human intercourse is such a deduction
from the interest of it that men of ability often avoid genteel society
altogether, and either devote themselves to solitary labors, cheered
principally by the companionship of books, or else keep to intimate
friends of their own order. In Continental countries the public
drinking-places are often frequented by men of culture, not because they
want to drink, but because they can talk freely about what they think and
what they know without being paralyzed by the determined ignorance of the
genteel. In England, no doubt, there is more information; and yet Stuart
Mill said that "general society as now carried on in England is so insipid
an affair, even to the persons who make it what it is, that it is kept up
for any reason rather than the pleasure it affords. All serious discussion
on matters in which opinions differ being considered ill-bred, and the
national deficiency in liveliness and sociability having prevented the
cultivation of the art of talking agreeably on trifles, the sole
attraction of what is called society to those who are not at the top of
the tree is the hope of being aided to climb a little higher. To a person
of any but a very common order in thought or feeling, such society, unless
he has personal objects to serve by it, must be supremely unattractive;
and most people in the present day of any really high class of intellect
make their contact with it so slight and at such long intervals as to be
almost considered as retiring from it altogether." The loss here is
distinctly to the genteel persons themselves. They may not feel it, they
may be completely insensible of it, but by making society insipid they
eliminate from it the very men who might have been its most valuable
elements, and who, whether working in solitude or living with a few
congenial spirits, are really the salt of the earth.




ESSAY XIX.

PATRIOTIC IGNORANCE.


Patriotic ignorance is maintained by the satisfaction that we feel in
ignoring what is favorable to another nation. It is a voluntary closing of
the mind against the disagreeable truth that another nation may be on
certain points equal to our own, or even, though inferior, in some degree
comparable to our own.

The effect of patriotic ignorance as concerning human intercourse is to
place any one who knows the exact truth in the unpleasant dilemma of
having either to correct mistakes which are strongly preferred to truth,
or else to give assent to them against his sense of justice. International
intercourse is made almost impossible by patriotic ignorance, except
amongst a few highly cultivated persons who are superior to it. Nothing is
more difficult than to speak about one's own country with foreigners who
are perpetually putting forward the errors which they have imbibed all
their lives, and to which they cling with such tenacity that it seems as
if those errors were, in some mysterious way, essential to their mental
comfort and well-being. If, on the other hand, we have any really intimate
knowledge of a foreign country, gained by long residence in it and
studious observation of the inhabitants, then we find a corresponding
difficulty in talking reasonably about it and them with our own
countrymen, because they, too, have their patriotic ignorance which they
prize and value as foreigners value theirs.

At the risk of turning this Essay into a string of anecdotes, I intend to
give a few examples of patriotic ignorance, in order to show to what an
astonishing degree of perfection it may attain. When we fully understand
this we shall also understand how those who possess such a treasure should
be anxious for its preservation. Their anxiety is the more reasonable that
in these days there is a difficulty in keeping things when they are easily
injured by light.

A French lady who possessed this treasure in its perfection gave, in my
hearing, as a reason why French people seldom visited England, that there
were no works of art there, no collections, no architecture, nothing to
gratify the artistic sense or the intelligence; and that it was only
people specially interested in trade and manufactures who went to England,
as the country had nothing to show but factories and industrial products.
On hearing this statement, there suddenly passed before my mind's eye a
rapid vision of the great works of architecture, sculpture, and painting
that I had seen in England, and a confused recollection of many minor
examples of these arts not quite unworthy of a studious man's attention.
It is impossible to contradict a lady; and any statement of the simple
truth would, in this instance, have been a direct and crushing
contradiction. I ventured on a faint remonstrance, but without effect; and
my fair enemy triumphed. There were no works of art in England. Thus she
settled the question.

This little incident led me to take note of French ideas about England
with reference to patriotic ignorance; and I discovered that there existed
a very general belief that there was no intellectual light of any kind in
England. Paris was the light of the world, and only so far as Parisian
rays might penetrate the mental fog of the British Islands was there a
chance of its becoming even faintly luminous. It was settled that the
speciality of England was trade and manufacture, that we were all of us
either merchants or cotton-spinners, and I discovered that we had no
learned societies, no British Museum, no Royal Academy of Arts.

An English painter, who for many years had exhibited on the line of the
Royal Academy, happened to be mentioned in my presence and in that of a
French artist. I was asked by some French people who knew him personally
whether the English painter had a good professional standing. I answered
that he had a fair though not a brilliant reputation; meanwhile the French
artist showed signs of uneasiness, and at length exploded with a vigorous
protest against the inadmissible idea that a painter could be anything
whatever who was not known at the French _Salon_. "Il n'est pas connu au
Salon de Paris, donc, il n'existe pas--il n'existe pas. Les réputations
dans les beaux-arts se font au Salon de Paris et pas ailleurs." This
Frenchman had no conception whatever of the simple fact that artistic
reputations are made in every capital of the civilized world. That was a
truth which his patriotism could not tolerate for a moment.

A French gentleman expressed his surprise that I did not have my books
translated into French, "because," said he, "no literary reputation can be
considered established until it has received the consecration of Parisian
approval." To his unfeigned astonishment I answered that London and not
Paris was the capital city of English literature, and that English authors
had not yet fallen so low as to care for the opinion of critics ignorant
of their language.

I then asked myself why this intense French patriotic ignorance should
continue so persistently; and the answer appeared to be that there was
something profoundly agreeable to French patriotic sentiment in the belief
that England had no place in the artistic and intellectual world. Until
quite recently the very existence of an English school of painting was
denied by all patriotic Frenchmen, and English art was rigorously excluded
from the Louvre.[21] Even now a French writer upon art can scarcely
mention English painting without treating it _de haut en bas_, as if his
Gallic nationality gave him a natural right to treat uncivilized islanders
with lofty disdain or condescending patronage.

My next example has no reference to literature or the fine arts. A young
French gentleman of superior education and manners, and with the instincts
of a sportsman, said in my hearing, "There is no game in England." His
tone was that of a man who utters a truth universally acknowledged.

It might be a matter of little consequence, as touching our national
pride, whether there was game in England or not. I have no doubt that some
philosophers would consider, and perhaps with reason, that the
non-existence of game, where it can only be maintained by an army of
keepers and a penal code of its own, would be the sign of an advancing
social state; but my young Frenchman was not much of a philosopher, and no
doubt he considered the non-existence of game in England a mark of
inferiority to France. There is something in the masculine mind, inherited
perhaps from ancestors who lived by the chase, which makes it look upon an
abundance of wild things that can be shot at, or run after with horses and
dogs, as a reason for the greatest pride and glorification. On reflection,
it will be found that there is more in the matter than at first sight
appears. As there is no game in England, of course there are no sportsmen
in that country. The absence of game means the absence of shooters and
huntsmen, and consequently an inferiority in manly exercises to the
French, thousands of whom take shooting licenses and enjoy the
invigorating excitement of the chase. For this reason it is agreeable to
French patriotic sentiment to be perfectly certain that there is no game
in England. When I inquired what reason my young friend had for holding
his conviction on the subject, he told me that in a country like England,
so full of trade and manufactures, there could not be any room for game.

One of the most popular of French songs is that charming one by Pierre
Dupont in praise of his vine. Every Frenchman who knows anything knows
that song, and believes that he also knows the tune. The consequence is
that when one of them begins to sing it his companions join in the refrain
or chorus, which is as follows:--

  "Bons Français, quand je vois mon verre
   Plein de ce vin couleur de feu
   Je songe en remerciant Dieu
   Qu'ils n'en ont pas dans l'Angleterre!"

The singers repeat "qu'ils n'en ont pas," and besides this the whole of
the last line is repeated with triumphant emphasis.

We need not feel hurt by this little outburst of patriotism. There is no
real hatred of England at the bottom of it, only a little "malice" of a
harmless kind, and the song is sometimes sung good-humoredly in the
presence of Englishmen. It is, however, really connected with patriotic
ignorance. The common French belief is that as vines are not grown in
England, we have no wine in our cellars, so that English people hardly
know the taste of wine; and this belief is too pleasing to the French mind
to be readily abandoned by those who hold it. They feel that it enhances
the delightfulness of every glass they drink. The case is precisely the
same with fruit. The French enjoy plenty of excellent fruit, and they
enjoy it all the more heartily from a firm conviction that there is no
fruit of any kind in England. "Pas un fruit," said a countryman of Pierre
Dupont in writing about our unfavored island, "pas un fruit ne mûrit dans
ce pays." What, not even a gooseberry? Were the plums, pears,
strawberries, apples, apricots, that we consumed in omnivorous boyhood
every one of them unripe? It is lamentable to think how miserably the
English live. They have no game, no wine, no fruit (it appears to be
doubtful, too, whether they have any vegetables), and they dwell in a
perpetual fog where sunshine is totally unknown. It is believed, also,
that there is no landscape-beauty in England,--nothing but a green field
with a hedge, and then another green field with another hedge, till you
come to the bare chalk cliffs and the dreary northern sea. The English
have no Devonshire, no valley of the Severn, no country of the Lakes. The
Thames is a foul ditch, without a trace of natural beauty anywhere.[22]

It would be easy to give many more examples of the patriotism of our
neighbors, but perhaps for the sake of variety it may be desirable to turn
the glass in the opposite direction and see what English patriotism has to
say about France. We shall find the same principle at work, the same
determination to believe that the foreign country is totally destitute of
many things on which we greatly pride ourselves. I do not know that there
is any reason to be proud of having mountains, as they are excessively
inconvenient objects that greatly impede agriculture and communication;
however, in some parts of Great Britain it is considered, somehow, a glory
for a nation to have mountains; and there used to be a firm belief that
French landscape was almost destitute of mountainous grandeur. There were
the Highlands of Scotland, but who had ever heard of the Highlands of
France? Was not France a wearisome, tame country that unfortunately had to
be traversed before one could get to Switzerland and Italy? Nobody seemed
to have any conception that France was rich in mountain scenery of the
very grandest kind. Switzerland was understood to be the place for
mountains, and there was a settled but erroneous conviction that Mont
Blanc was situated in that country. As for the Grand-Pelvoux, the Pointe
des Écrins, the Mont Olan, the Pic d'Arsine, and the Trois Ellions, nobody
had ever heard of them. If you had told any average Scotchman that the
most famous Bens would be lost and nameless in the mountainous departments
of France, the news would have greatly surprised him. He would have been
astonished to hear that the area of mountainous France exceeded the area
of Scotland, and that the height of its loftiest summits attained three
times the elevation of Ben Nevis.

It may be excusable to feel proud of mountains, as they are noble objects
in spite of their inconvenience, but it seems less reasonable to be
patriotic about hedges, which make us pay dearly for any beauty they may
possess by hiding the perspective of the land. A hedge six feet high
easily masks as many miles of distance. However, there is a pride in
English hedges, accompanied by a belief that there are no such things in
France. The truth is that regions of large extent are divided by hedges in
France as they are in England Another belief is that there is little or
no wood in France, though wood is the principal fuel, and vast forests are
reserved for its supply. I have heard an Englishman proudly congratulating
himself, in the spirit of Dupont's song, on the supposed fact that the
French had neither coal nor iron; and yet I have visited a vast
establishment at the Creuzot, where ten thousand workmen are continually
employed in making engines, bridges, armor-plates, and other things from
iron found close at hand, by the help of coal fetched from a very little
distance. I have read in an English newspaper that there were no singing
birds in France; and by way of commentary a hundred little French
songsters kept up a merry din that would have gladdened the soul of
Chaucer. It happened, too, to be the time of the year for nightingales,
which filled the woods with their music in the moonlight.

Patriotic ignorance often gets hold of some partial truth unfavorable to
another country, and then applies it in such an absolute manner that it is
truth no longer. It is quite true, for example, that athletic exercises
are not so much cultivated in France, nor held in such high esteem, as
they are in England, but it is not true that all young Frenchmen are
inactive. They are often both good swimmers and good pedestrians, and,
though they do not play cricket, many of them take a practical interest in
gymnastics and are skilful on the bar and the trapeze. The French learn
military drill in their boyhood, and in early manhood they are inured to
fatigue in the army, besides which great numbers of them learn fencing on
their own account, that they may hold their own in a duel. Patriotic
ignorance likes to shut its eyes to all inconvenient facts of this kind,
and to dwell on what is unfavorable. A man may like a glass of absinthe in
a _café_ and still be as energetic as if he drank port wine at home. I
know an old French officer who never misses his daily visit to the _café_,
and so might serve as a text for moralizing, but at the same time he walks
twenty kilomètres every day. Patriotic ignorance has its opportunity in
every difference of habit. What can be apparently more indolent, for an
hour or two after _déjeûner_, than a prosperous man of business in Paris?
Very possibly he may be caught playing cards or dominoes in the middle of
the day, and severely blamed by a foreign censor. The difference between
him and his equal in London is simply in the arrangement of time. The
Frenchman has been at his work early, and divides his day into two parts,
with hours of idleness between them.

Many examples of those numerous international criticisms that originate in
patriotic ignorance are connected with the employment of words that are
apparently common to different nations, yet vary in their signification.
One that has given rise to frequent patriotic criticisms is the French
word _univers_. French writers often say of some famous author, such as
Victor Hugo, "Sa renommée remplit l'univers;" or of some great warrior,
like Napoleon, "Il inquiéta l'univers." English critics take up these
expressions and then say, "Behold how bombastic these French writers are,
with their absurd exaggerations, as if Victor Hugo and Napoleon astonished
the universe, as if they were ever heard of beyond our own little
planet!" Such criticism only displays patriotic ignorance of a foreign
language. The French expression is perfectly correct, and not in the least
exaggerated. Napoleon did not disquiet the universe, but he disquieted
_l'univers_. Victor Hugo is not known beyond the terrestrial globe, but he
is known, by name at least, throughout _l'univers_. The persistent
ignorance of English writers on this point would be inexplicable if it
were not patriotic; if it did not afford an opportunity for deriding the
vanity of foreigners. It is the more remarkable that the deriders
themselves constantly use the word in the same restricted sense as an
adjective or an adverb. I open Mr. Stanford's atlas, and find that it is
called "The London Atlas of _Universal Geography_," though it does not
contain a single map of any planet but our own, not even one of the
visible hemisphere of the moon, which might easily have been given. I take
a newspaper, and I find that the late President of the Royal Society died
_universally_ respected, though he was known only to the cultivated
inhabitants of a single planet. Such is the power of patriotic ignorance
that it is able to prevent men from understanding a foreign word when they
themselves employ a nearly related word in identically the same
sense.[23]

The word _univers_ reminds me of universities, and they recall a striking
example of patriotic ignorance in my own countrymen. I wonder how many
Englishmen there are who know anything about the University of France. I
never expect an Englishman to know anything about it; and, what is more, I
am always prepared to find him impervious to any information on the
subject. As the organization of the University of France differs
essentially from that of English universities, each of which is localized
in one place, and can be seen in its entirety from the top of a tower, the
Englishman hears with contemptuous inattention any attempt to make him
understand an institution without a parallel in his own country. Besides
this, the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge are venerable and wealthy
institutions, visibly beautiful, whilst the University of France is of
comparatively recent origin; and, though large sums are expended in its
service, the result does not strike the eye because the expenditure is
distributed over the country. I remember having occasion to mention the
Academy of Lyons to a learned doctor of Oxford who was travelling in
France, and I found that he had never heard of the Academy of Lyons, and
knew nothing about the organization of the national university of which
that academy forms a part. From a French point of view this is quite as
remarkable an example of patriotic ignorance as if some foreigner had
never heard of the diocese of York, or the episcopal organization of the
Church of England. Every Frenchman who has any education at all knows the
functions of academies in the university, and which of the principal
cities are the seats of those learned bodies.

As Englishmen ignore the University of France, they naturally at the same
time ignore the degrees that it confers. They never know what a _Licencié_
is, they have no conception of the _Agrégation_, or of the severe ordeal
of competitive examination through which an _Agrégé_ must have passed.
Therefore, if a Frenchman has attained either of these grades, his title
is unintelligible to an Englishman.

There is, no doubt, great ignorance in France on the subject of the
English universities, but it is neither in the same degree nor of the same
kind. I should hardly call French ignorance of the classes at Oxford
patriotic ignorance, because it does not proceed from the belief that a
foreign university is unworthy of a Frenchman's attention. I should call
French ignorance of the Royal Academy, for example, genuine patriotic
ignorance, because it proceeds from a conviction that English art is
unworthy of notice, and that the French _Salon_ is the only exhibition
that can interest an enlightened lover of art. That is the essence of
patriotism in ignorance,--to be ignorant of what is done in another
nation, because we believe our own to be first and the rest nowhere; and
so the English ignorance of the University of France is genuine patriotic
ignorance. It is caused by the existence of Oxford and Cambridge, as the
French ignorance of the Royal Academy is caused by the French _Salon_.

Patriotic ignorance is one of the most serious impediments to conversation
between people of different nationality, because occasions are continually
arising when the national sentiments of the one are hurt by the ignorance
of the other. But we may also wound the feelings of a foreigner by
assuming a more complete degree of ignorance on his part than that which
is really his. This is sometimes done by English people towards Americans,
when English people forget that their national literature is the common
possession of the two countries. A story is told by Mr. Grant White of an
English lady who informed him that a novel (which she advised him to read)
had been written about Kenilworth, by Sir Walter Scott; and he expected
her to recommend a perusal of the works of William Shakespeare. Having
lived much abroad, I am myself occasionally the grateful recipient of
valuable information from English friends. For example, I remember an
Englishman who kindly and quite seriously informed me that Eton College
was a public school where many sons of the English aristocracy were
educated.

There is a very serious side to patriotic ignorance in relation to war.
There can be no doubt that many of the most foolish, costly, and
disastrous wars ever undertaken were either directly due to patriotic
ignorance, or made possible only by the existence of such ignorance in the
nation that afterwards suffered by them. The way in which patriotic
ignorance directly tends to produce war is readily intelligible. A nation
sees its own soldiers, its own cannons, its own ships, and becomes so
proud of them as to remain contentedly and even wilfully ignorant of the
military strength and efficiency of its neighbors. The war of 1870-71, so
disastrous to France, was the direct result of patriotic ignorance. The
country and even the Emperor himself were patriotically ignorant of their
own inferior military condition and of the superior Prussian organization.
One or two isolated voices were raised in warning, but it was considered
patriotic not to listen to them. The war between Turkey and Russia, which
cost Turkey Bulgaria and all but expelled her from Europe, might easily
have been avoided by the Sultan; but he was placed in a false position by
the patriotic ignorance of his own subjects, who believed him to be far
more powerful than he really was, and who would have probably dethroned or
murdered him if he had acted rationally, that is to say, in accordance
with the degree of strength that he possessed. In almost every instance
that I am able to remember, the nations that have undertaken imprudent and
easily avoidable wars have done so because they were blinded by patriotic
ignorance, and therefore either impelled their rulers into a foolish
course against their better knowledge, or else were themselves easily led
into peril by the temerity of a rash master, who would risk the well-being
of all his subjects that he might attain some personal and private end.
The French have been cured of their most dangerous patriotic
ignorance,--that concerning the military strength of the country,--by the
war of 1870, but the cure was of a costly nature.

Patriotism has been so commonly associated with a wilful closing of the
eyes against unpleasant facts, that those who prefer truth to illusion are
often considered unpatriotic. Yet surely ignorance has not the immense
advantage over knowledge of having all patriotism on her side. There is a
far higher and better patriotism than that of ignorance; there is a love
of country that shows itself in anxiety for its best welfare, and does not
remain satisfied with the vain delusion of a fancied superiority in
everything. It is the interest of England as a nation to be accurately
informed about all that concerns her position in the world, and it is
impossible for her to receive this information if a stupid national vanity
is always ready to take offence when it is offered. It is desirable for
England to know exactly in what degree she is a military power, and also
how she stands with reference to the naval armaments of other nations, not
as they existed in the days of Nelson, but as they will exist next year.
It is the interest of England to know by what tenure she holds India, just
as in the reign of George the Third it would have been very much the
interest of England to know accurately both the rights of the American
colonists and their strength. I cannot imagine any circumstances that
might make ignorance more desirable for a free people than knowledge. With
enslaved peoples the case is different: the less they know and the
greater, perhaps, are their chances of enjoying the dull kind of somnolent
happiness which alone is attainable by them; but this is a kind of
happiness that no citizen of a free country would desire.




ESSAY XX.

CONFUSIONS.


Surely the analytical faculty must be very rare, or we should not so
commonly find people confounding together things essentially distinct. Any
one who possesses that faculty naturally, and has followed some occupation
which strengthens it, must be continually amused if he has a humorous
turn, or irritated if he is irascible, by the astounding mental confusions
in which men contentedly pass their lives. To be just, this account ought
to include both sexes, for women indulge in confusions even more
frequently than men, and are less disposed to separate things when they
have once been jumbled together.

A confusion of ideas in politics which is not uncommon amongst the enemies
of all change is to believe that whoever desires the reform of some law
wants to do something that is not legal, and has a rebellious, subversive
spirit. Yet the reformer is not a rebel; it is indeed the peculiar
distinction of his position not to be a rebel, for there has never been a
real reformer (as distinguished from a revolutionist) who wished to do
anything illegal. He desires, certainly, to do something which is not
legal just at present, but he does not wish to do it so long as it remains
in the condition of illegality. He wishes first to make it legal by
obtaining legislative sanction for his proposal, and then to do it when it
shall have become as legal as anything else, and when all the most
conservative people in the kingdom will be strenuous in its defence as
"part and parcel of the law of the land."

Another confusion in political matters which has always been extremely
common is that between private and public liberty. Suppose that a law were
enacted to the effect that each British subject without exception should
go to Mass every Sunday morning, on pain of death, and should take the
Roman Catholic Sacrament of Holy Communion, involving auricular
confession, at Easter; such a law would not be an infringement of the
sensible liberty of Roman Catholics, because they do these things already.
Then they might say, "People talk of the tyranny of the law, yet the law
is not tyrannical at all; we enjoy perfect liberty in England, and it is
most unreasonable to say that we do not." The Protestant part of the
community would exclaim that such a law was an intolerable infringement of
liberty, and would rush to arms to get rid of it. This is the distinction
between private and public liberty. There is private liberty when some men
are not interfered with in the ordinary habits of their existence; and
there has always been much of such private liberty under the worst of
despotisms; but there is not public liberty until every man in the country
may live according to his own habits, so long as he does not interfere
with the rights of others. Here is a distinction plain enough to be
evident to a very commonplace understanding; yet the admirers of tyrants
are often successful in producing a confusion between the two things, and
in persuading people that there was "ample liberty" under some foreign
despot, because they themselves, when they visited the country that lay
prostrate under his irresistible power, were allowed to eat good dinners,
and drive about unmolested, and amuse themselves by day and by night
according to every suggestion of their fancy.

Many confusions have been intentionally maintained by political enemies in
order to cast odium on their adversaries; so that it becomes of great
importance to a political cause that it should not bear a name with two
meanings, or to which it may be possible to give another meaning than that
which was originally intended. The word "Radical" is an instance of this.
According to the enemies of radicalism it has always meant a political
principle that strikes at the root of the constitution; but it was not
that meaning of the word which induced the first Radicals to commit the
imprudence of adopting it. The term referred to agriculture rather than
tree-felling, the original idea being to uproot abuses as a gardener pulls
weeds up by the roots. I distinctly remember my first boyish notion of the
Radicals. I saw them in a sort of sylvan picture,--violent savage men
armed with sharp axes, and hewing away at the foot of a majestic oak that
stood for the glory of England. Since then I have become acquainted with
another instance of the unfortunate adoption of a word which may be
plausibly perverted from its meaning. The French republican motto is
_Liberté, Égalité, Fraternité_, and to this day there is hardly an
English newspaper that does not from time to time sneer at the French
Republicans for aspiring to equality, as if equality were not impossible
in the nature of things, and as if, supposing an unnatural equality to be
established to-day, the operation of natural causes would not bring about
inequality to-morrow. We are told that some men would be stronger, or
cleverer, or more industrious than others, and earn more and make
themselves leaders; that children of the same parents, starting in life
with the same fortunes, never remain in precisely the same positions; and
much more to the same purpose. All this trite and familiar reasoning is
without application here. The word _Égalité_ in the motto means something
which _can_ be attained, and which, though it did not exist in France
before the Revolution, is now almost a perfect reality there,--it means
equality before the law; it means that there shall not be privileged
classes exempt from paying taxes, and favored with such scandalous
partiality that all posts of importance in the government, the army, the
magistracy, and the church are habitually reserved for them. If it meant
absolute equality, no Republican could aim at wealth, which is the
creation of inequality in his own favor; neither would any Republican
labor for intellectual reputation, or accept honors. There would not even
be a Republican in the gymnastic societies, where every member strives to
become stronger and more agile than his fellows, and knows that, whether
in his favor or against him, the most striking inequalities will be
manifested in every public contest. There would be no Republicans in the
University, for has it not a hierarchy with the most marked gradations of
title, and differences of consideration and authority? Yet the University
is so full of Republicans that it is scarcely too much to say that it is
entirely composed of them. I am aware that there are dreamers in the
working classes, both in France and elsewhere, who look forward to a
social state when all men will work for the same wages,--when the
Meissonier of the day will be paid like a sign-painter, and the
sign-painter like a white-washer, and all three perform each other's tasks
by turns for equality of agreeableness in the work; but these dreams are
only possible in extreme ignorance, and lie quite outside of any theories
to be seriously considered.

Religious intolerance, when quite sincere and not mixed up with social
contempt or political hatred, is founded upon a remarkable confusion of
ideas, which is this. The persecutor assumes that the heretic knowingly
and maliciously resists the will of God in rejecting the theology which he
knows that God desires him to receive. This is a confusion between the
mental states of the believer and the unbeliever, and it does not
accurately describe either, for the believer of course accepts the
doctrine, and the unbeliever does not reject it as coming from God, but
precisely because he is convinced that it has a purely human origin.

"Are you a Puseyite?" was a question put to a lady in my hearing; and she
at once answered, "Certainly not, I should be ashamed of being a
Puseyite." Here was a confusion between her present mental state and her
supposed possible mental state as a Puseyite; for it is impossible to be a
real Puseyite and at the same time to think of one's belief with an inward
sense of shame. A believer always thinks that his belief is simply the
truth, and nobody feels ashamed of believing what is true. Even
concealment of a belief does not imply shame; and those who have been
compelled, in self-defence, to hide their real opinions, have been
ashamed, if at all, of hiding and not of having them.

A confusion common to all who do not think, and avoided only with the
greatest difficulty by those who do, is that between their own knowledge
and the knowledge possessed by another person who has different tastes,
different receptive powers, and other opportunities. They cannot imagine
that the world does not appear the same to him that it appears to them.
They do not really believe that he can feel quite differently from
themselves and still be in every respect as sound in mind and as
intelligent as they are. The incapacity to imagine a different mental
condition is strikingly manifested in what we call the Philistine mind,
and is one of its strongest characteristics. The true Philistine thinks
that every form of culture which opens out a world that is closed against
himself leaves the votary exactly where he was before. "I cannot imagine
why you live in Italy," said a Philistine to an acquaintance; "nothing
could induce _me_ to live in Italy." He did not take into account the
difference of gifts and culture, but supposed the person he addressed to
have just his own mental condition, the only one that he was able to
conceive, whereas, in fact, that person was so endowed and so educated as
to enjoy Italy in the supreme degree. He spoke the purest Italian with
perfect ease; he had a considerable knowledge of Italian literature and
antiquities; his love of natural beauty amounted to an insatiable passion;
and from his youth he had delighted in architecture and painting. Of these
gifts, tastes, and acquirements the Philistine was simply destitute. For
him Italy could have had no meaning. Where the other found unfailing
interest he would have suffered from unrelieved _ennui_, and would have
been continually looking back, with the intolerable longing of nostalgia,
to the occupations of his English home. In the same spirit a French
_bourgeois_ once complained in my hearing that too much space was given to
foreign affairs in the newspapers, "car, vous comprenez, cela n'intéresse
pas." This was simply an attribution of his personal apathy to everybody
else. Certainly, as a nation, the French take less interest in foreign
affairs than we do, but they do take some interest, and the degree of it
is exactly reflected by the importance given to foreign affairs in their
journals, always greatest in the best of them. An Englishman said, also in
my hearing, that to have a library was a mistake, as a library was of no
use; he admitted that a few books might be useful if the owner read them
through. Here, again, is the attribution of one person's experience to all
cases. This man had never himself felt the need of a library, and did not
know how to use one. He could not realize the fact that a few books only
allow you to read, whilst a library allows you to pursue a study. He could
not at all imagine what the word "library" means to a scholar,--that it
means the not being stopped at every turn for want of light, the not being
exposed to scornful correction by men of inferior ability and inferior
industry, whose only superiority is the great and terrible one of living
within a cabfare of the British Museum. I remember reading an account of
the establishment of a Greek professorship in a provincial town, and it
was wisely proposed, by one who understood the difficulties of a scholar
remote from the great libraries, that provision should be made for the
accumulation of books for the use of the future occupants of the chair,
but the trustees (honest men of business, who had no idea of a scholar's
wants and necessities) said that each professor must provide his own
library, just as road commissioners advertise that a surveyor must have
his own horse.

One of the most serious reasons why it is imprudent to associate with
people whose opinions you do not wish to be made responsible for is that
others will confound you with them. There is an old Latin proverb, and
also a French one, to the effect that if a man knows what your friends
are, he knows what you are yourself. These proverbs are not true, but they
well express the popular confusion between having something in common and
having everything in common. If you are on friendly terms with clergymen,
it is inferred that you have a clerical mind; when the reason may be that
you are a scholar living in the country, and can find no scholarship in
your neighborhood except in the parsonage houses. You associate with
foreigners, and are supposed to be unpatriotic; when in truth you are as
patriotic as any rational and well-informed creature can be, but have a
faculty for languages that you like to exercise in conversation. This kind
of confusion takes no account of the indisputable fact that men constantly
associate together on the ground of a single pursuit that they have in
common, often a mere amusement, or because, in spite of every imaginable
difference, they are drawn together by one of those mysterious natural
affinities which are so obscure in their origin and action that no human
intelligence can explain them.

Not only are a man's tastes liable to be confounded with those of his
personal acquaintances, but he may find some trade attributed to him, by a
perfectly irrational association of ideas, because it happens to be
prevalent in the country where he lives. I have known instances of men
supposed to have been in the cotton trade simply because they had lived in
Lancashire, and of others supposed to be in the mineral oil trade for no
other reason than because they had lived in a part of France where mineral
oil is found.

Professional men are usually very much alive to the danger of confusion as
affecting their success in life. If you are known to do two things, a
confusion gets established between the two, and you are no longer classed
with that ease and decision which the world finds to be convenient. It
therefore becomes a part of worldly wisdom to keep one of the occupations
in obscurity, and if that is not altogether possible, then to profess as
loudly and as frequently as you can that it is entirely secondary and only
a refreshment after more serious toils. Many years ago a well-known
surgeon published a set of etchings, and the merit of them was so
dangerously conspicuous, so superior, in fact, to the average of
professional work, that he felt constrained to keep those too clever
children in their places by a quotation from Horace,--

      "O laborum
  Dulce lenimen!"

To present one's self to the world always in one character is a great help
to success, and maintains the stability of a position. The kings in the
story-books and on playing cards who have always their crowns on their
heads and sceptres in their hands, appear to enjoy a decided advantage
over modern royalty, which dresses like other people and enters into
common interests and pursuits. Literary men admire the prudent
self-control of our literary sovereign, Tennyson, who by his rigorous
abstinence from prose takes care never to appear in public without his
singing robes and his crown of laurel. Had he carelessly and familiarly
employed the commoner vehicle of expression, there would have been a
confusion of two Tennysons in the popular idea, whilst at present his name
is as exclusively associated with the exquisite music of his verse as that
of Mozart with another kind of melody.

The great evil of confusions, as they affect conversation, is that they
constantly place a man of accurate mental habits in such trying situations
that, unless he exercises the most watchful self-control, he is sure to
commit the sin of contradiction. We have all of us met with the lady who
does not think it necessary to distinguish between one person and
another, who will tell a story of some adventure as having happened to A,
when in reality it happened to B; who will attribute sayings and opinions
to C, when they properly belong to D; and deliberately maintain that it is
of no consequence whatever, when some suffering lover of accuracy
undertakes to set her right. It is in vain to argue that there really does
exist, in the order of the universe, a distinction between one person and
another, though both belong to the human race; and that organisms are
generally isolated, though there has been an exception in the case of the
Siamese twins. The death of the wonderful swimmer who attempted to descend
the rapids of Niagara afforded an excellent opportunity for confounders.
In France they all confounded him with Captain Boyton, who swam with an
apparatus; and when poor Webb was sucked under the whirlpool they said,
"You see that, after all, his inflated dress was of no avail." Fame of a
higher kind does not escape from similar confusions. On the death of
George Eliot, French readers of English novels lamented that they would
have nothing more from the pen that wrote "John Halifax," and a cultivated
Frenchman expressed his regret for the author of "Adam Bede" and "Uncle
Tom's Cabin."[24]

Men who have trained themselves in habits of accurate observation often
have a difficulty in realizing the confused mental condition of those who
simply receive impressions without comparison and classification. A fine
field for confused tourists is architecture. They go to France and Italy,
they talk about what they have seen, and leave you in bewilderment, until
you make the discovery that they have substituted one building for
another, or, better still, mixed two different edifices inextricably
together. Foreigners of this class are quite unable to establish any
distinction between the Houses of Parliament and Westminster Abbey,
because both have towers; and they are not clear about the difference
between the British Museum and the National Gallery, because there are
columns in the fronts of both.[25] English tourists will stay some time in
Paris, and afterwards not be able to distinguish between photographs of
the Louvre and the Hôtel de Ville. We need not be surprised that people
who have never studied architecture at all should not be sure whether St.
Paul's is a Gothic building or not, but the wonder is that they seem to
retain no impressions received merely by the eye. One would think that the
eye alone, without knowledge, would be enough to establish a distinction
between one building and another altogether different from it; yet it is
not so.

I cannot close this chapter without some allusion to a crafty employment
of words only too well understood already by those who influence the
popular mind. There is such a natural tendency to confusion in all
ordinary human beings that if you repeatedly present to them two totally
distinct things at the same time, they will, before long, associate them
so closely as to consider them inseparable by their very nature. This is
the reason why all those branches of education that train the mind in
analysis are so valuable. To be able to distinguish between accidental
connections of things or characteristics and necessary connections, is one
of the best powers that education bestows upon us. By far the greater
number of erroneous popular notions are due simply to the inability to
make this distinction which belongs to all undisciplined minds. Calumnies,
that have great influence over such minds, must lose their power as the
habit of analysis enables people to separate ideas which the uncultivated
mingle together.

Insufficient analysis leads to a very common sort of confusion between the
defectiveness of a part only and a defect pervading the whole. An
invention (as often happens) does not visibly succeed on the first trial,
and then the whole of the common public will at once declare the invention
to be bad, when, in reality, it may be a good invention with a local
defect, easily remediable. Suppose that a yacht misses stays, the common
sort of criticism would be to say that she was a bad boat, when, in fact,
her hull and everything else might be thoroughly well made, and the defect
be due only to a miscalculation in the placing of her canvas. I have
myself seen a small steel boat sink at her anchorage, and a crowd laugh
at her as badly contrived, when her only defect was the unobserved
starting of a rivet. The boat was fished up, the rivet replaced, and she
leaked and sank no more. When Stephenson's locomotive did not go because
its wheels slid on the rails, the vulgar spectators were delighted with
the supposed failure of a benefactor of the human species, and set up a
noise of jubilant derision. The invention, they had decided, was of no
good, and they sang their own foolish _gaudeamus igitur_. Stephenson at
once perceived that the only defect was want of weight, and he immediately
proceeded to remedy it by loading the machine with ballast. So it is in
thousands of cases. The common mind, untrained in analysis, condemns the
whole as a failure, when the defect lies in some small part which the
specialist, trained in analysis, seeks for and discovers.

I have not touched upon the confusions due to the decline of the
intellectual powers. In that case the reason is to be sought for in the
condition of the brain, and there is, I believe, no remedy. In healthy
people, enjoying the complete vigor of their faculties, confusions are
simply the result of carelessness and indolence, and are proper subjects
for sarcasm. With senile confusions the case is very different. To treat
them with hard, sharp, decided correction, as is so often done by people
of vigorous intellect, is a most cruel abuse of power. Yet it is difficult
to say what ought to be done when an old person falls into manifest errors
of this kind. Simple acquiescence is in this case a pardonable abandonment
of truth, but there are situations in which it is not possible. Then you
find yourself compelled to show where the confusion lies. You do it as
gently as may be, but you fail to convince, and awaken that tenacious,
unyielding opposition which is a characteristic of decline in its earlier
stages. All that can be said is, that when once it has become evident that
confusions are not careless but senile, they ought to be passed over if
possible, and if not, then treated with the very utmost delicacy and
gentleness.




ESSAY XXI.

THE NOBLE BOHEMIANISM.


Amongst the common injustices of the world there have been few more
complete than its reprobation of the state of mind and manner of life that
have been called Bohemianism; and so closely is that reprobation attached
to the word that I would gladly have substituted some other term for the
better Bohemianism had the English language provided me with one. It may,
however, be a gain to justice itself that we should be compelled to use
the same expression, qualified only by an adjective, for two states of
existence that are the good and the bad conditions of the same, as it will
tend to make us more charitable to those whom we must always blame, and
yet may blame with a more or less perfect understanding of the causes that
led them into error.

The lower forms of Bohemianism are associated with several kinds of vice,
and are therefore justly disliked by people who know the value of a
well-regulated life, and, when at the worst, regarded by them with
feelings of positive abhorrence. The vices connected with these forms of
Bohemianism are idleness, irregularity, extravagance, drunkenness, and
immorality; and besides these vices the worst Bohemianism is associated
with many repulsive faults that may not be exactly vices, and yet are
almost as much disliked by decent people. These faults are slovenliness,
dirt, a degree of carelessness in matters of business, often scarcely to
be distinguished from dishonesty, and habitual neglect of the decorous
observances that are inseparable from a high state of civilization.

After such an account of the worst Bohemianism, in which, as the reader
perceives, I have extenuated nothing, it may seem almost an act of
temerity to advance the theory that this is only the bad side of a state
of mind and feeling that has its good and perfectly respectable side also.
If this seems difficult to believe, the reader has only to consider how
certain other instincts of humanity have also their good and bad
developments. The religious and the sexual instincts, in their best
action, are on the side of national and domestic order, but in their worst
action they produce sanguinary quarrels, ferocious persecutions, and the
excesses of the most degrading sensuality. It is therefore by no means a
new theory that a human instinct may have a happy or an unfortunate
development, and it is not a reason for rejecting Bohemianism, without
unprejudiced examination, that the worst forms of it are associated with
evil.

Again, before going to the _raison d'être_ of Bohemianism, let me point to
one consideration of great importance to us if we desire to think quite
justly. It is, and has always been, a characteristic of Bohemianism to be
extremely careless of appearances, and to live outside the shelter of
hypocrisy; so its vices are far more visible than the same vices when
practised by men of the world, and incomparably more offensive to persons
with a strong sense of what is called "propriety." At the time when the
worst form of Bohemianism was more common than it is now, its most serious
vices were also the vices of the best society. If the Bohemian drank to
excess, so did the nobility and gentry; if the Bohemian had a mistress, so
had the most exalted personages. The Bohemian was not so much blamed for
being a sepulchre as for being an ill-kept sepulchre, and not a whited
sepulchre like the rest. It was far more his slovenliness and poverty than
his graver vices that made him offensive to a corrupt society with fine
clothes and ceremonious manners.

Bohemianism and Philistinism are the terms by which, for want of better,
we designate two opposite ways of estimating wealth and culture. There are
two categories of advantages in wealth,--the intellectual and the
material. The intellectual advantages are leisure to think and read,
travel, and intelligent conversation. The material advantages are large
and comfortable houses, tables well served and abundant, good coats, clean
linen, fine dresses and diamonds, horses, carriages, servants, hot-houses,
wine-cellars, shootings. Evidently the most perfect condition of wealth
would unite both classes of advantages; but this is not always, or often,
possible, and it so happens that in most situations a choice has to be
made between them. The Bohemian is the man who with small means desires
and contrives to obtain the intellectual advantages of wealth, which he
considers to be leisure to think and read, travel, and intelligent
conversation. The Philistine is the man who, whether his means are small
or large, devotes himself wholly to the attainment of the other set of
advantages,--a large house, good food and wine, clothes, horses, and
servants.

The Philistine gratifies his passion for comfort to a wonderful extent,
and thousands of ingenious people are incessantly laboring to make his
existence more comfortable still, so that the one great inconvenience he
is threatened with is the super-multiplication of conveniences. Now there
is a certain noble Bohemianism which perceives that the Philistine life is
not really so rich as it appears, that it has only some of the advantages
which ought to belong to riches, and these not quite the best advantages;
and this noble Bohemianism makes the best advantages its first aim, being
contented with such a small measure of riches as, when ingeniously and
skilfully employed, may secure them.

A highly developed material luxury, such as that which fills our modern
universal exhibitions and is the great pride of our age, has in itself so
much the appearance of absolute civilization that any proposal to do
without it may seem like a return to savagery; and Bohemianism is exposed
to the accusation of discouraging arts and manufactures. There is a
physical side to Bohemianism to be considered later; and there may,
indeed, be some connection between Bohemianism and the life of a red
Indian who roams in his woods and contents himself with a low standard of
physical well-being. The fair statement of the case between Bohemianism
and the civilization of arts and manufactures is as follows: the
intelligent Bohemian does not despise them; on the contrary, when he can
afford it, he encourages them and often surrounds himself with beautiful
things; but he will not barter his mental liberty in exchange for them, as
the Philistine does so readily. If the Bohemian simply prefers sordid
idleness to the comfort which is the reward of industry, he has no part in
the higher Bohemianism, but combines the Philistine fault of intellectual
apathy with the Bohemian fault of standing aloof from industrial
civilization. If a man abstains from furthering the industrial
civilization of his country he is only excusable if he pursues some object
of at least equal importance. Intellectual civilization really is such an
object, and the noble Bohemianism is excusable for serving it rather than
that other civilization of arts and manufactures which has such numerous
servants of its own. If the Bohemian does not redeem his negligence of
material things by superior intellectual brightness, he is half a
Philistine, he is destitute of what is best in Bohemianism (I had nearly
written of all that is worth having in it), and his contempt for material
perfection has no longer any charm, because it is not the sacrifice of a
lower merit to a higher, but the blank absence of the lower merit not
compensated or condoned by the presence of anything nobler or better.

Bohemianism and Philistinism are alike in combining self-indulgence with
asceticism, but they are ascetic or self-indulgent in opposite directions.
Bohemianism includes a certain self-indulgence, on the intellectual side,
in the pleasures of thought and observation and in the exercise of the
imaginative faculties, combining this with a certain degree of asceticism
on the physical side, not a severe religious asceticism, but a
disposition, like that of a thorough soldier or traveller, to do without
luxury and comfort, and take the absence of them gayly when they are not
to be had. The self-indulgence of Philistinism is in bodily comfort, of
which it has never enough; its asceticism consists in denying itself
leisure to read and think, and opportunities for observation.

The best way of describing the two principles will be to give an account
of two human lives that exemplified them. These shall not be described
from imagination, but from accurate memory; and I will not have recourse
to the easy artifice of selecting an unfavorable example of the class with
which I happen to have a minor degree of personal sympathy. My Philistine
shall be one whom I sincerely loved and heartily respected. He was an
admirable example of everything that is best and most worthy in the
Philistine civilization; and I believe that nobody who ever came into
contact with him, or had dealings with him, received any other impression
than this, that he had a natural right to the perfect respect which
surrounded him. The younger son of a poor gentleman, he began life with
narrow means, and followed a profession in a small provincial town. By
close attention and industry he saved a considerable sum of money, which
he lost entirely through the dishonesty of a trusted but untrustworthy
acquaintance. He had other mishaps, which but little disturbed his
serenity, and he patiently amassed enough to make himself independent. In
every relation of life he was not only above reproach, he was much more
than that: he was a model of what men ought to be, yet seldom are, in
their conduct towards others. He was kind to every one, generous to those
who needed his generosity, and, though strict with himself, tolerant
towards aberrations that must have seemed to him strangely unreasonable.
He had great natural dignity, and was a gentleman in all his ways, with an
old-fashioned grace and courtesy. He had no vanity; there may have been
some pride as an ingredient in his character, but if so it was of a kind
that could hurt nobody, for he was as simple and straightforward in his
intercourse with the poor as he was at ease with the rich.

After this description (which is so far from being overcharged that I have
omitted, for the sake of brevity, many admirable characteristics), the
reader may ask in what could possibly consist the Philistinism of a nature
that had attained such excellence. The answer is that it consisted in the
perfect willingness with which he remained outside of every intellectual
movement, and in the restriction of his mental activity to riches and
religion. He used to say that "a man must be contentedly ignorant of many
things," and he lived in this contented ignorance. He knew nothing of the
subjects that awaken the passionate interest of intellectual men. He knew
no language but his own, bought no books, knew nothing about the fine
arts, never travelled, and remained satisfied with the life of his little
provincial town. Totally ignorant of all foreign literatures, ancient or
modern, he was at the same time so slightly acquainted with that of his
own country that he had not read, and scarcely even knew by name, the most
famous authors of his own generation. His little bookcase was filled
almost exclusively with evangelical sermons and commentaries. This is
Philistinism on the intellectual side, the mental inertness that remains
"contentedly ignorant" of almost everything that a superior intellect
cares for. But, besides this, there is also a Philistinism on the physical
side, a physical inertness; and in this, too, my friend was a real
Philistine. In spite of great natural strength, he remained inexpert in
all manly exercises, and so had not enjoyed life on that side as he might
have done, and as the Bohemian generally contrives to do. He belonged to
that class of men who, as soon as they reach middle age, are scarcely more
active than the chairs they sit upon, the men who would fall from a horse
if it were lively, upset a boat if it were light, and be drowned if they
fell into the water. Such men can walk a little on a road, or they can sit
in a carriage and be dragged about by horses. By this physical inertia my
friend was deprived of one set of impressions, as he was deprived by his
intellectual inertia of another. He could not enjoy that close intimacy
with nature which a Bohemian generally finds to be an important part of
existence.

I wonder if it ever occurred to him to reflect, in the tedious hours of
too tranquil age, how much of what is best in the world had been simply
_missed_ by him; how he had missed all the variety and interest of travel,
the charm of intellectual society, the influences of genius, and even the
physical excitements of healthy out-door amusements. When I think what a
magnificent world it is that we inhabit, how much natural beauty there is
in it, how much admirable human work in literature and the fine arts, how
many living men and women there are in each generation whose acquaintance
a wise man would travel far to seek, and value infinitely when he had
found it, I cannot avoid the conclusion that my friend might have lived as
he did in a planet far less richly endowed than ours, and that after a
long life he went out of the world without having really known it.

I have said that the intelligent Bohemian is generally a man of small or
moderate means, whose object is to enjoy the _best_ advantages (not the
most visible) of riches. In his view these advantages are leisure, travel,
reading, and conversation. His estimate is different from that of the
Philistine, who sets his heart on the lower advantages of riches,
sacrificing leisure, travel, reading, and conversation, in order to have a
larger house and more servants. But how, without riches, is the Bohemian
to secure the advantages that he desires, for they also belong to riches?
There lies the difficulty, and the Bohemian's way of overcoming it
constitutes the romance of his existence. In absolute destitution the
intelligent Bohemian life is not possible. A little money is necessary for
it, and the art and craft of Bohemianism is to get for that small amount
of money such an amount of leisure, reading, travel, and good conversation
as may suffice to make life interesting. The way in which an old-fashioned
Bohemian usually set about it was this: he treated material comfort and
outward appearances as matters of no consequence, accepting them when they
came in his way, but enduring the privation of them gayly. He learned the
art of living on a little.

  "Je suis pauvre, très pauvre, et vis pourtant fort bien
   C'est parce que je vis comme les gens de rien."[26]

He spent the little that he had, first for what was really necessary, and
next for what really gave him pleasure, but he spent hardly anything in
deference to the usages of society. In this way he got what he wanted. His
books were second-hand and ill bound, but he _had_ books and read them;
his clothes were shabby, yet still they kept him warm; he travelled in all
sorts of cheap ways and frequently on foot; he lived a good deal in some
unfashionable quarters in a capital city, and saw much of art, nature, and
humanity.

To exemplify the true theory of Bohemianism let me describe from memory
two rooms, one of them inhabited by an English lady, not at all Bohemian,
the other by a German of the coarser sex who was essentially and
thoroughly Bohemian. The lady's room was not a drawing-room, being a
reasonable sort of sitting-room without any exasperating inutilities, but
it was extremely, excessively comfortable. Half hidden amongst its
material comforts might be found a little rosewood bookcase containing a
number of pretty volumes in purple morocco that were seldom, if ever,
opened. My German Bohemian was a steady reader in six languages; and if
he had seen such a room as that he would probably have criticised it as
follows. He would have said, "It is rich in superfluities, but has not
what is necessary. The carpet is superfluous; plain boards are quite
comfortable enough. One or two cheap chairs and tables might replace this
costly furniture. That pretty rosewood bookcase holds the smallest number
of books at the greatest cost, and is therefore contrary to true economy;
give me, rather, a sufficiency of long deal shelves all innocent of paint.
What is the use of fine bindings and gilt edges? This little library is
miserably poor. It is all in one language, and does not represent even
English literature adequately; there are a few novels, books of poems, and
travels, but I find neither science nor philosophy. Such a room as that,
with all its comfort, would seem to me like a prison. My mind needs wider
pastures." I remember his own room, a place to make a rich Englishman
shudder. One climbed up to it by a stone corkscrew-stair, half-ruinous, in
an old mediæval house. It was a large room, with a bed in one corner, and
it was wholly destitute of anything resembling a carpet or a curtain. The
remaining furniture consisted of two or three rush-bottomed chairs, one
large cheap lounging-chair, and two large plain tables. There were plenty
of shelves (common deal, unpainted), and on them an immense litter of
books in different languages, most of them in paper covers, and bought
second-hand, but in readable editions. In the way of material luxury there
was a pot of tobacco; and if a friend dropped in for an evening a jug of
ale would make its appearance. My Bohemian was shabby in his dress, and
unfashionable; but he had seen more, read more, and passed more hours in
intelligent conversation than many who considered themselves his
superiors. The entire material side of life had been systematically
neglected, in his case, in order that the intellectual side might
flourish. It is hardly necessary to observe that any attempt at luxury or
visible comfort, any conformity to fashion, would have been incompatible,
on small means, with the intellectual existence that this German scholar
enjoyed.

Long ago I knew an English Bohemian who had a small income that came to
him very irregularly. He had begun life in a profession, but had quitted
it that he might travel and see the world, which he did in the oddest,
most original fashion, often enduring privation, but never ceasing to
enjoy life deeply in his own way, and to accumulate a mass of observations
which would have been quite invaluable to an author. In him the two
activities, physical and mental, were alike so energetic that they might
have led to great results had they been consistently directed to some
private or public end; but unfortunately he remained satisfied with the
existence of an observant wanderer who has no purpose beyond the healthy
exercise of his faculties. In usefulness to others he was not to be
compared with my good and admirable Philistine, but in the art of getting
for himself what is best in the world he was by far the more accomplished
of the two. He fully enjoyed both the physical and the intellectual life;
he could live almost like a red Indian, and yet at the same time carry in
his mind the most recent results of European thought and science. His
distinguishing characteristic was a heroic contempt for comfort, in which
he rather resembled a soldier in war-time than any self-indulgent
civilian. He would sleep anywhere,--in his boat under a sail, in a
hayloft, under a hedge if belated, and he would go for days together
without any regular meal. He dressed roughly, and his clothes became old
before he renewed them. He kept no servant, and lived in cheap lodgings in
towns, or hired one or two empty rooms and adorned them with a little
portable furniture. In the country he contrived to make very economical
arrangements in farmhouses, by which he was fed and lodged quite as well
as he ever cared to be. It would be difficult to excel him in simple
manliness, in the quiet courage that accepts a disagreeable situation or
faces a dangerous one; and he had the manliness of the mind as well as
that of the body; he estimated the world for what it is worth, and cared
nothing for its transient fashions either in appearances or opinion. I am
sorry that he was a useless member of society,--if, indeed, such an
eccentric is to be called a member of society at all,--but if uselessness
is blamable he shares the blame, or ought in justice to share it, with a
multitude of most respectable gentlemen and ladies who receive nothing but
approbation from the world.

Except this fault of uselessness there was nothing to blame in this man's
manner of life, but his want of purpose and discipline made his fine
qualities seem almost without value. And now comes the question whether
the fine qualities of the useless Bohemian may not be of some value in a
life of a higher kind. I think it is evident that they may, for if the
Bohemian can cheerfully sacrifice luxury for some mental gain he has made
a great step in the direction of the higher life, and only requires a
purpose and a discipline to attain it. Common men are completely enslaved
by their love of comfort, and whoever has emancipated himself from this
thraldom has gained the first and most necessary victory. The use that he
will make of it depends upon himself. If he has high purposes, his
Bohemianism will be ennobled by them, and will become a most precious
element in his character; and if his purposes are not of the highest, the
Bohemian element may still be very valuable if accompanied by
self-discipline. Napoleon cannot be said to have had high purposes, but
his Bohemianism was admirable. A man who, having attained success, with
boundless riches at his disposal, could quit the luxury of his palaces and
sleep anywhere, in any poor farmhouse, or under the stars by the fire of a
bivouac, and be satisfied with poor meals at the most irregular hours,
showed that, however he may have estimated luxury, he was at least
entirely independent of it. The model monarch in this respect was Charles
XII. of Sweden, who studied his own personal comfort as little as if he
had been a private soldier. Some royal commanders have carried luxury into
war itself, but not to their advantage. When Napoleon III. went in his
carriage to meet his fate at Sedan the roads were so encumbered by wagons
belonging to the Imperial household as to impede the movements of the
troops.

There is often an element of Bohemianism where we should least expect to
find it. There is something of it in our English aristocracy, though it is
not _called_ Bohemianism here because it is not accompanied by poverty;
but the spirit that sacrifices luxury to rough travelling is, so far, the
true Bohemian spirit. In the aristocracy, however, such sacrifices are
only temporary; and a rough life accepted for a few weeks or months gives
the charm of a restored freshness to luxury on returning to it. The class
in which the higher Bohemianism has most steadily flourished is the
artistic and literary class, and here it is visible and recognizable
because there is often poverty enough to compel the choice between the
objects of the intelligent Bohemian and those of ordinary men. The early
life of Goldsmith, for example, was that of a genuine Bohemian. He had
scarcely any money, and yet he contrived to get for himself what the
intelligent Bohemian always desires, namely, leisure to read and think,
travel, and interesting conversation. When penniless and unknown he
lounged about the world thinking and observing; he travelled in Holland,
France, Switzerland, and Italy, not as people do in railway carriages, but
in leisurely intercourse with the inhabitants. Notwithstanding his poverty
he was received by the learned in different European cities, and, notably,
heard Voltaire and Diderot talk till three o'clock in the morning. So long
as he remained faithful to the true principles of Bohemianism he was happy
in his own strange and eccentric way, and all the anxieties, all the
slavery of his later years were due to his apostasy from those
principles. He no longer estimated leisure at its true value when he
allowed himself to be placed in such a situation that he was compelled to
toil like a slave in order to clear off work that had been already paid
for, such advances having been rendered necessary by expenditure on
Philistine luxuries. He no longer enjoyed humble travel but on his later
tour in France with Mrs. Horneck and her two beautiful daughters, instead
of enjoying the country in his own old simple innocent way, he allowed his
mind to be poisoned with Philistine ideas, and constantly complained of
the want of physical comfort, though he lived far more expensively than in
his youth. The new apartments, taken on the success of the "Good-natured
Man," consisted, says Irving, "of three rooms, which he furnished with
mahogany sofas, card-tables, and bookcases; with curtains, mirrors, and
Wilton carpets." At the same time he went even beyond the precept of
Polonius, for his garments were costlier than his purse could buy, and his
entertainments were so extravagant as to give pain to his acquaintances.
All this is a desertion of real Bohemian principles. Goldsmith ought to
have protected his own leisure, which, from the Bohemian point of view,
was incomparably more precious to himself than Wilton carpets and coats
"of Tyrian bloom."

Corot, the French landscape-painter, was a model of consistent Bohemianism
of the best kind. When his father said, "You shall have £80 a year, your
plate at my table, and be a painter; or you shall have £4,000 to start
with if you will be a shop-keeper," his choice was made at once. He
remained always faithful to true Bohemian principles, fully understanding
the value of leisure, and protecting his artistic independence by the
extreme simplicity of his living. He never gave way to the modern rage for
luxuries, but in his latter years, when enriched by tardy professional
success and hereditary fortune, he employed his money in acts of fraternal
generosity to enable others to lead the intelligent Bohemian life.

Wordsworth had in him a very strong element of Bohemianism. His long
pedestrian rambles, his interest in humble life and familiar intercourse
with the poor, his passion for wild nature, and preference of natural
beauty to fine society, his simple and economical habits, are enough to
reveal the tendency. His "plain living and high thinking" is a thoroughly
Bohemian idea, in striking opposition to the Philistine passion for rich
living and low thinking. There is a story that he was seen at a
breakfast-table to cut open a new volume with a greasy butter-knife. To
every lover of books this must seem horribly barbarous, yet at the same
time it was Bohemian, in that Wordsworth valued the thought only and cared
nothing for the material condition of the volume. I have observed a like
indifference to the material condition of books in other Bohemians, who
took the most lively interest in their contents. I have also seen
"bibliophiles" who had beautiful libraries in excellent preservation, and
who loved to fondle fine copies of books that they never read. That is
Philistine, it is the preference of material perfection to intellectual
values.

The reader is, I hope, fully persuaded by this time that the higher
Bohemianism is compatible with every quality that deserves respect, and
that it is not of necessity connected with any fault or failing. I may
therefore mention as an example of it one of the purest and best
characters whom it was ever my happiness to know. There was a strong
element of noble Bohemianism in Samuel Palmer, the landscape-painter.
"From time to time," according to his son, "he forsook his easel, and
travelled far away from London smoke to cull the beauties of some favorite
country side. His painting apparatus was complete, but singularly simple,
his dress and other bodily requirements simpler still; so he could walk
from village to hamlet easily carrying all he wanted, and utterly
indifferent to luxury. With a good constitution it mattered little to him
how humble were his quarters or how remote from so-called civilization.
'In exploring wild country,' he writes, 'I have been for a fortnight
together, uncertain each day whether I should get a bed under cover at
night; and about midsummer I have repeatedly been walking all night to
watch the mystic phenomena of the silent hours.' He enjoyed to the full
this rough but not uncomfortable mode of travelling, and was better
pleased to take his place, after a hard day's work, in some old chimney
corner--joining on equal terms the village gossip--than to mope in the
dull grandeur of a private room."

Here are two of my Bohemian elements,--the love of travel and the love of
conversation. As for the other element,--the love of leisure to think and
read,--it is not visible in this extract (though the kind of travel
described is leisurely), but it was always present in the man. During the
quiet, solitary progress by day and night there were ample opportunities
for thinking, and as for reading we know that Palmer never stirred without
a favorite author in his pocket, most frequently Milton or Virgil. To
complete the Bohemian we only require one other
characteristic,--contentment with a simple material existence; and we are
told that "the painting apparatus was singularly simple, the dress and
other bodily requirements simpler still." So here we have the intelligent
Bohemian in his perfection.

All this is the exact opposite of Philistine "common sense." A Philistine
would not have exposed himself, voluntarily, to the certainty of poor
accommodation. A Philistine would not have remained out all night "to
watch the mystic phenomena of the silent hours." In the absence of a
railway he would have hired a carriage, and got through the wild country
rapidly to arrive at a good dinner. Lastly, a Philistine would not have
carried either Milton or Virgil in his pocket; he would have had a
newspaper.

Some practical experience of the higher Bohemianism is a valuable part of
education. It enables us to estimate things at their true worth, and to
extract happiness from situations in which the Philistine is both dull and
miserable. A true Bohemian, of the best kind, knows the value of mere
shelter, of food enough to satisfy hunger, of plain clothes that will keep
him sufficiently warm; and in the things of the mind he values the liberty
to use his own faculties as a kind of happiness in itself. His philosophy
leads him to take an interest in talking with human beings of all sorts
and conditions, and in different countries. He does not despise the poor,
for, whether poor or rich in his own person, he understands simplicity of
life, and if the poor man lives in a small cottage, he, too, has probably
been lodged less spaciously still in some small hut or tent. He has lived
often, in rough travel, as the poor live every day. I maintain that such
tastes and experiences are valuable both in prosperity and in adversity.
If we are prosperous they enhance our appreciation of the things around
us, and yet at the same time make us really know that they are not
indispensable, as so many believe them to be; if we fall into adversity
they prepare us to accept lightly and cheerfully what would be depressing
privations to others. I know a painter who in consequence of some change
in the public taste fell into adversity at a time when he had every reason
to hope for increased success. Very fortunately for him, he had been a
Bohemian in early life,--a respectable Bohemian, be it understood,--and a
great traveller, so that he could easily dispense with luxuries. "To be
still permitted to follow art is enough," he said; so he reduced his
expenses to the very lowest scale consistent with that pursuit, and lived
as he had done before in the old Bohemian times. He made his old clothes
last on, he slung a hammock in a very simple painting-room, and cooked his
own dinner on the stove. With the canvas on his easel and a few books on a
shelf he found that if existence was no longer luxurious it had not yet
ceased to be interesting.




ESSAY XXII.

OF COURTESY IN EPISTOLARY COMMUNICATION.


The universal principle of courtesy is that the courteous person manifests
a disposition to sacrifice something in favor of the person whom he
desires to honor; the opposite principle shows itself in a disposition to
regard our own convenience as paramount over every other consideration.

Courtesy lives by a multitude of little sacrifices, not by sacrifices of
sufficient importance to impose any burdensome sense of obligation. These
little sacrifices may be both of time and money, but more of time, and the
money sacrifice should be just perceptible, never ostentatious.

The tendency of a hurried age, in which men undertake more work or more
pleasure (hardest work of all!) than they are able properly to accomplish,
is to abridge all forms of courtesy because they take time, and to replace
them by forms, if any forms survive, which cost as little time as
possible. This wounds and injures courtesy itself in its most vital part,
for the essence of it is the willingness to incur that very sacrifice
which modern hurry avoids.

The first courtesy in epistolary communication is the mere writing of the
letter. Except in cases where the letter itself is an offence or an
intrusion, the mere making of it is an act of courtesy towards the
receiver. The writer sacrifices his time and a trifle of money in order
that the receiver may have some kind of news.

It has ever been the custom to commence a letter with some expression of
respect, affection, or good will. This is graceful in itself, and
reasonable, being nothing more than the salutation with which a man enters
the house of his friend, or his more ceremonious act of deference in
entering that of a stranger or a superior. In times and seasons where
courtesy has not given way to hurry, or a selfish dread of unnecessary
exertion, the opening form is maintained with a certain amplitude, and the
substance of the letter is not reached in the first lines, which gently
induce the reader to proceed. Afterwards these forms are felt to involve
an inconvenient sacrifice of time, and are ruthlessly docked.

In justice to modern poverty in forms it is fair to take into
consideration the simple truth, so easily overlooked, that we have to
write thirty letters where our ancestors wrote one; but the principle of
sacrifice in courtesy always remains essentially the same; and if of our
more precious and more occupied time we consecrate a smaller portion to
forms, it is still essential that there should be no appearance of a
desire to escape from the kind of obligation which we acknowledge.

The most essentially modern element of courtesy in letter-writing is the
promptitude of our replies. This promptitude was not only unknown to our
remote ancestors, but even to our immediate predecessors. They would
postpone answering a letter for days or weeks, in the pure spirit of
procrastination, when they already possessed all the materials necessary
for the answer. Such a habit would try our patience very severely, but our
fathers seem to have considered it a part of their dignity to move slowly
in correspondence. This temper even yet survives in official
correspondence between sovereigns, who still notify to each other their
domestic events long after the publication of them in the newspapers.

A prompt answer equally serves the purpose of the sender and the receiver.
It is a great economy of time to answer promptly, because the receiver of
the letter is so much gratified by the promptitude itself that he readily
pardons brevity in consideration of it. An extremely short but prompt
letter, that would look curt without its promptitude, is more polite than
a much longer one written a few days later.

Prompt correspondents save all the time that others waste in excuses. I
remember an author and editor whose system imposed upon him the tax of
perpetual apologizing. He always postponed writing until the delay had put
his correspondent out of temper, so that when at last he _did_ write,
which somehow happened ultimately, the first page was entirely occupied
with apologies for his delay, as he felt that the necessity had arisen for
soothing the ruffled feelings of his friend. It never occurred to him that
the same amount of pen work which these apologies cost him would, if given
earlier, have sufficed for a complete answer. A letter-writer of this sort
must naturally be a bad man of business, and this gentleman was so, though
he had excellent qualities of another order.

I remember receiving a most extraordinary answer from a correspondent of
this stamp. I wrote to him about a matter which was causing me some
anxiety, and did not receive an answer for several weeks. At last the
reply came, with the strange excuse that as he knew I had guests in my
house he had delayed writing from a belief that I should not be able to
attend to anything until after their departure. If such were always the
effect of entertaining friends, what incalculable perturbation would be
caused by hospitality in all private and public affairs!

The reader may, perhaps, have met with a collection of letters called the
"Plumpton Correspondence," which was published by the Camden Society in
1839. I have always been interested in this for family reasons, and also
because the manuscript volume was found in the neighborhood where I lived
in youth;[27] but it does not require any blood connection with the now
extinct house of Plumpton of Plumpton to take an interest in a collection
of letters which gives so clear an insight into the epistolary customs of
England in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. The first peculiarity
that strikes the modern reader is the extreme care of almost all the
writers, even when near relations, to avoid a curt and dry style,
destitute of the ambages which were in those days esteemed an essential
part of politeness. The only exception is a plain, straightforward
gentleman, William Gascoyne, who heads his letters, "To my Uncle Plumpton
be these delivered," or "To my Uncle Plumpton this letter be delivered in
hast." He begins, "Uncle Plumpton, I recommend me unto you," and
finishes, "Your nephew," simply, or still more laconically, "Your." Such
plainness is strikingly rare. The rule was, to be deliberately perfect in
all epistolary observances, however near the relationship. Not that the
forms used were hard forms, entirely fixed by usage and devoid of personal
feeling and individuality. They appear to have been more flexible and
living than our own, as they were more frequently varied according to the
taste and sentiment of the writers. Sometimes, of course, they were
perfunctory, but often they have an original and very graceful turn. One
letter, which I will quote at length, contains curious evidence of the
courtesy and discourtesy of those days. The forms used in the letter
itself are perfect, but the writer complains that other letters have not
been answered.

In the reign of Henry VII. Sir Robert Plumpton had a daughter, Dorothy,
who was in the household of Lady Darcy (probably as a sort of maid of
honor to her ladyship), but was not quite pleased with her position, and
wanted to go home to Plumpton. She had written to her father several
times, but had received no answer, so she now writes again to him in these
terms. The date of the letter is not fully given, as the year is wanting;
but her parents were married in 1477, and her father died in 1523, at the
age of seventy, after a life of strange vicissitudes. The reader will
observe two leading characteristics in this letter,--that it is as
courteous as if the writer were not related to the receiver, and as
affectionate as if no forms had been observed. As was the custom in those
days, the young lady gives her parents their titles of worldly honor, but
she always adds to them the most affectionate filial expressions:

    _To the right worshipfull and my most entyerly beloved, good, kind
    father, Sir Robart Plompton, knyght, lying at Plompton in Yorkshire,
    be thes delivered in hast._

    Ryght worshipfull father, in the most humble manner that I can I
    recommend me to you, and to my lady my mother, and to all my brethren
    and sistren, whom I besech almyghtie God to mayntayne and preserve in
    prosperus health and encrese of worship, entyerly requiering you of
    your daly blessing; letting you wyt that I send to you mesuage, be
    Wryghame of Knarsbrugh, of my mynd, and how that he should desire you
    in my name to send for me to come home to you, and as yet I had no
    answere agane, the which desire my lady hath gotten knowledg.
    Wherefore, she is to me more better lady than ever she was before,
    insomuch that she hath promysed me hir good ladyship as long as ever
    she shall lyve; and if she or ye can fynd athing meyter for me in this
    parties or any other, she will helpe to promoote me to the uttermost
    of her puyssaunce. Wherefore, I humbly besech you to be so good and
    kind father unto me as to let me know your pleasure, how that ye will
    have me ordred, as shortly as it shall like you. And wryt to my lady,
    thanking hir good ladyship of hir so loving and tender kyndnesse
    shewed unto me, beseching hir ladyship of good contynewance thereof.
    And therefore I besech you to send a servant of yours to my lady and
    to me, and show now by your fatherly kyndnesse that I am your child;
    for I have sent you dyverse messuages and wryttings, and I had never
    answere againe. Wherefore yt is thought in this parties, by those
    persones that list better to say ill than good, that ye have litle
    favor unto me; the which error ye may now quench yf yt will like you
    to be so good and kynd father unto me. Also I besech you to send me a
    fine hatt and some good cloth to make me some kevercheffes. And thus I
    besech _Jesu_ to have you in his blessed keeping to his pleasure, and
    your harts desire and comforth. Wryten at the Hirste, the xviii day of
    Maye.

        By your loving daughter,
            DORYTHE PLOMPTON.

It may be worth while, for the sake of contrast, and that we may the
better perceive the lost fragrance of the antique courtesy, to put the
substance of this letter into the style of the present day. A modern young
lady would probably write as follows:--

    HIRST, _May 18_.

    DEAR PAPA,--Lady Darcy has found out that I want to leave her, but she
    has kindly promised to do what she can to find something else for me.
    I wish you would say what you think, and it would be as well, perhaps,
    if you would be so good as to drop a line to her ladyship to thank
    her. I have written to you several times, but got no answer, so people
    here say that you don't care very much for me. Would you please send
    me a handsome bonnet and some handkerchiefs? Best love to mamma and
    all at home.

        Your affectionate daughter,
            DOROTHY PLUMPTON.

This, I think, is not an unfair specimen of a modern letter.[28] The
expressions of worship, of humble respect, have disappeared, and so far it
may be thought that there is improvement, yet that respect was not
incompatible with tender feeling; on the contrary, it was closely
associated with it, and expressions of sentiment have lost strength and
vitality along with expressions of respect. Tenderness may be sometimes
shown in modern letters, but it is rare; and when it occurs it is
generally accompanied by a degree of familiarity which our ancestors would
have considered in bad taste. Dorothy Plumpton's own letter is far richer
in the expression of tender feeling than any modern letter of the
courteous and ceremonious kind, or than any of those pale and commonplace
communications from which deep respect and strong affection are almost
equally excluded. Please observe, moreover, that the young lady had reason
to be dissatisfied with her father for his neglect, which does not in the
least diminish the filial courtesy of her style, but she chides him in the
sweetest fashion,--"_Show now by your fatherly kindness that I am your
child_." Could anything be prettier than that, though the reproach
contained in it is really one of some severity?

Dorothy's father, Sir Robert, puts the following superscription on a
letter to his wife, "To my entyrely and right hartily beloved wife, Dame
Agnes Plumpton, be this Letter delivered." He begins his letter thus, "My
deare hart, in my most hartily wyse, I recommend mee unto you;" and he
ends tenderly, "By your owne lover, Robert Plumpton, Kt." She, on the
contrary, though a faithful and brave wife, doing her best for her husband
in a time of great trial, and enjoying his full confidence, begins her
letters, "Right worshipful Sir," and ends simply, "By your wife, Dame
Agnes Plumpton." She is so much absorbed by business that her expressions
of feeling are rare and brief. "Sir, I am in good health, and all your
children prays for your daly blessing. And all your servants is in good
health and prays diligently for your good speed in your matters."

The generally courteous tone of the letters of those days may be judged of
by the following example. The reader will observe how small a space is
occupied with the substance of the letter in comparison with the
expressions of pure courtesy, and how simply and handsomely regret for the
trespass is expressed:--

    _To his worshipful Cosin, Sir Robart Plompton, Kt._

    Right reverend and worshipful Cosin, I commend me unto you as hertyly
    as I can, evermore desiring to heare of your welfare, the which I
    besech _Jesu_ to continew to his pleasure, and your herts desire.
    Cosin, please you witt that I am enformed, that a poor man somtyme
    belonging to mee, called Umfrey Bell, hath trespased to a servant of
    youres, which I am sory for. Wherefore, Cosin, I desire and hartily
    pray you to take upp the matter into your own hands for my sake, and
    rewle him as it please you; and therein you wil do, as I may do that
    may be plesur to you, and my contry, the which I shalbe redy too, by
    the grace of God, who preserve you.

        By your own kynsman,
            ROBART WARCOPP, of Warcoppe.

The reader has no doubt by this time enough of these old letters, which
are not likely to possess much charm for him unless, like the present
writer, he is rather of an antiquarian turn.[29]

The quotations are enough to show some of the forms used in correspondence
by our forefathers, forms that were right in their own day, when the state
of society was more ceremonious and deferential, but no one would propose
to revive them. We may, however, still value and cultivate the beautifully
courteous spirit that our ancestors possessed and express it in our own
modern ways.

I have already observed that the essentially modern form of courtesy is
the rapidity of our replies. This, at least, is a virtue that we can
resolutely cultivate and maintain. In some countries it is pushed so far
that telegrams are very frequently sent when there is no need to employ
the telegraph. The Arabs of Algeria are extremely fond of telegraphing for
its own sake: the notion of its rapidity pleases and amuses them; they
like to wield a power so wonderful. It is said that the Americans
constantly employ the telegraph on very trivial occasions, and the habit
is increasing in England and France. The secret desire of the present age
is to find a plausible excuse for excessive brevity in correspondence, and
this is supplied by the comparative costliness of telegraphing. It is a
comfort that it allows you to send a single word. I have heard of a letter
from a son to a father consisting of the Latin word _Ibo_, and of a still
briefer one from the father to the son confined entirely to the imperative
_I_. These miracles of brevity are only possible in letters between the
most intimate friends or relations, but in telegraphy they are common.

It is very difficult for courtesy to survive this modern passion for
brevity, and we see it more and more openly cast aside. All the long
phrases of politeness have been abandoned in English correspondence for a
generation, except in formal letters to official or very dignified
personages; and the little that remains is reduced to a mere shred of
courteous or affectionate expression. We have not, it is true, the
detestable habit of abridging words, as our ancestors often did, but we
cut our phrases short, and sometimes even words of courtesy are abridged
in an unbecoming manner. Men will write Dr. Sir for Dear Sir. If I am
dear enough to these correspondents for their sentiments of affection to
be worth uttering at all, why should they be so chary of expressing them
that they omit two letters from the very word which is intended to affect
my feelings?

  "If I be dear, if I be dear,"

as the poet says, why should my correspondent begrudge me the four letters
of so brief an adjective?

The long French and Italian forms of ceremony at the close of letters are
felt to be burdensome in the present day, and are gradually giving place
to briefer ones; but it is the very length of them, and the time and
trouble they cost to write, that make them so courteous, and no brief form
can ever be an effective substitute in that respect.

I was once placed in the rather embarrassing position of having suddenly
to send telegrams in my own name, containing a request, to two high
foreign authorities in a corps where punctilious ceremony is very strictly
observed. My solution of the difficulty was to write two full ceremonious
letters, with all the formal expressions unabridged, and then have these
letters telegraphed _in extenso_. This was the only possible solution, as
an ordinary telegram would have been entirely out of the question. It
being rather expensive to telegraph a very formal letter, the cost added
to the appearance of deference, so I had the curious but very real
advantage on my side that I made a telegram seem even more deferential
than a letter.

The convenience of the letter-writer is consulted in inverse ratio to the
appearances of courtesy. In the matter of sealing, for example, that seems
so slight and indifferent a concern, a question of ceremony and courtesy
is involved. The old-fashioned custom of a large seal with the sender's
arms or cipher added to the importance of the contents both by strictly
guarding the privacy of the communication and by the dignified assertion
of the writer's rank. Besides this, the time that it costs to take a
proper impression of a seal shows the absence of hurry and the disposition
to sacrifice which are a part of all noble courtesy; whilst the act of
rapidly licking the gum on the inside of an envelope and then giving it a
thump with your fist to make it stick is neither dignified nor elegant.
There were certain beautiful associations with the act of sealing. There
was the taper that had to be lighted, and that had its own little
candlestick of chased or gilded silver, or delicately painted porcelain;
there was the polished and graven stone of the seal, itself more or less
precious, and enhanced in value by an art of high antiquity and noble
associations, and this graven signet-stone was set in massive gold. The
act of sealing was deliberate, to secure a fair impression, and as the wax
caught flame and melted it disengaged a delicate perfume. These little
things may be laughed at by a generation of practical men of business who
know the value of every second, but they had their importance, and have it
still, amongst those who possess any delicacy of perception.[30] The
reader will remember the sealing of Nelson's letter to the Crown Prince of
Denmark during the battle of Copenhagen. "A wafer was given him," says
Southey, "but he ordered a candle to be brought from the cockpit, and
sealed the letter with wax, _affixing a larger seal than he ordinarily
used_. 'This,' said he, 'is no time to appear hurried and informal.'" The
story is usually told as a striking example of Nelson's coolness in a time
of intense excitement, but it might be told with equal effect as a proof
of his knowledge of mankind and of the trifles which have a powerful
effect on human intercourse. The preference of wax to a wafer, and
especially the deliberate choice of a larger seal as more ceremonious and
important, are clear evidence of diplomatic skill. No doubt, too, the
impression of Nelson's arms was very careful and clear.

In writing to French Ministers of State it is a traditional custom to
employ a certain paper called "papier ministre," which is very much larger
than that sent to ordinary mortals. Paper is by no means a matter of
indifference. It is the material costume under which we present ourselves
to persons removed from us by distance; and as a man pays a call in
handsome clothes as a sign of respect to others, and also of self-respect,
so he sends a piece of handsome paper to be the bearer of his salutation.
Besides, a letter is in itself a gift, though a small one, and however
trifling a gift may be it must never be shabby. The English understand
this art of choosing good-looking letter-paper, and are remarkable for
using it of a thickness rare in other nations. French love of elegance has
led to charming inventions of tint and texture, particularly in delicate
gray tints, and these papers are now often decorated with embossed
initials of heraldic devices on a large scale, but that is carrying
prettiness too far. The common American habit of writing letters on ruled
paper is not to be recommended, as the ruling reminds us of copy-books and
account-books, and has a mechanical appearance that greatly detracts from
what ought to be the purely personal air of an autograph.

Modern love of despatch has led to the invention of the post-card, which,
from our present point of view, that of courtesy, deserves unhesitating
condemnation. To use a post-card is as much as to say to your
correspondent, "In order to save for myself a very little money and a very
little time, I will expose the subject of our correspondence to the eyes
of any clerk, postman, or servant, who feels the slightest curiosity about
it; and I take this small piece of card, of which I am allowed to use one
side only, in order to relieve myself from the obligation, and spare
myself the trouble, of writing a letter." To make the convenience
absolutely perfect, it is customary in England to omit the opening and
concluding salutations on post-cards, so that they are the _ne plus
ultra_, I will not say of positive rudeness, but of that negative rudeness
which is not exactly the opposite of courtesy, but its absence. Here
again, however, comes the modern principle; and promptitude and frequency
of communication may be accepted as a compensation for the sacrifice of
formality. It may be argued, and with reason, that when a man of our own
day sends a post-card his ancestors would have been still more laconic,
for they would have sent nothing at all, and that there are a thousand
circumstances in which a post-card may be written when it is not possible
to write a letter. A husband on his travels has a supply of such cards in
a pocket-book. With these, and his pencil, he writes a line once or twice
a day in train or steamboat, or at table between two dishes, or on the
windy platform of a railway station, or in the street when he sees a
letter-box. He sends fifty such communications where his father would
have written three letters, and his grandfather one slowly composed and
slowly travelling epistle.

Many modern correspondents appreciate the convenience of the post-card,
but their conscience, as that of well-bred people, cannot get over the
fault of its publicity. For these the stationers have devised several
different substitutes. There is the French plan of what is called "Un Mot
à la Poste," a piece of paper with a single fold, gummed round the other
three edges, and perforated like postage-stamps for the facility of the
opener.[31] There is the miniature sheet of paper that you have not to
fold, and there is the card that you enclose in an envelope, and that
prepares the reader for a very brief communication. Here, again, is a very
curious illustration of the sacrificial nature of courtesy. A card is
sent; why a card? Why not a piece of paper of the same size which would
hold as many words? The answer is that a card is handsomer and more
costly, and from its stiffness a little easier to take out of the
envelope, and pleasanter to hold whilst reading, so that a small sacrifice
is made to the pleasure and convenience of the receiver, which is the
essence of courtesy in letter-writing. All this brief correspondence is
the offspring of the electric telegraph. Our forefathers were not used to
it, and would have regarded it as an offence. Even at the present date
(1884) it is not quite safe to write in our brief modern way to persons
who came to maturity before the electric telegraph was in use.

There is a wide distinction between brevity and hurry; in fact, brevity,
if of the intelligent kind, is the best preservative against hurry. Some
men write short letters, but are very careful to observe all the forms;
and they have the great advantage that the apparent importance of the
formal expressions is enhanced by the shortness of the letter itself. This
is the case in Robert Warcopp's letter to Sir Robert Plumpton.

When hurry really exists, and it is impossible to avoid the appearance of
it, as when a letter _cannot_ be brief, yet must be written at utmost
speed, the proper course is to apologize for hurry at the beginning and
not at the end of the letter. The reader is then propitiated at once, and
excuses the slovenly penmanship and style.

It is remarkable that legibility of handwriting should never have been
considered as among the essentials of courtesy in correspondence. It is
obviously for the convenience of the reader that a letter should be easily
read; but here another consideration intervenes. To write very legibly is
the accomplishment of clerks and writing-masters, who are usually poor
men, and, as such, do not hold a high social position. Aristocratic pride
has always had it for a principle to disdain, for itself, the
accomplishments of professional men; and therefore a careless scrawl is
more aristocratic than a clean handwriting, if the scrawl is of a
fashionable kind. Perhaps the historic origin of this feeling may be the
scorn of the ignorant mediæval baron for writing of all kinds as beneath
the attention of a warrior. In a cultured age there may be a reason of a
higher order. It may be supposed that attention to mechanical excellence
is incompatible with the action of the intellect; and people are curiously
ready to imagine incompatibilities where they do not really exist. As a
matter of fact, some men of eminent intellectual gifts write with as
exquisite a clearness in the formation of their letters as in the
elucidation of their ideas. It is easily forgotten, too, that the same
person may use different kinds of handwriting, according to circumstances,
like the gentleman whose best hand some people could read, whose middling
hand the writer himself could read, and whose worst neither he nor any
other human being could decipher. Legouvé, in his exquisite way, tells a
charming story of how he astonished a little girl by excelling her in
calligraphy. His scribble is all but illegible, and she was laughing at it
one day, when he boldly challenged her to a trial. Both sat down and
formed their letters with great patience, as in a writing class, and it
turned out, to the girl's amazement, that the scribbling Academician had
by far the more copperplate-like hand of the two. He then explained that
his bad writing was simply the result of speed. Frenchmen provokingly
reserve their very worst and most illegible writing for the signature. You
are able to read the letter but not the signature, and if there is not
some other means of ascertaining the writer's name you are utterly at
fault.

The old habit of crossing letters, now happily abandoned, was a direct
breach of real, though not of what in former days were conventional, good
manners. To cross a letter is as much as to say, "In order to spare myself
the cost of another sheet of paper or an extra stamp, I am quite willing
to inflict upon you, my reader, the trouble of disengaging one set of
lines from another." Very economical people in the past generation saved
an occasional penny in another way at the cost of the reader's eyes. They
diluted their ink with water, till the recipient of the letter cried,
"Prithee, why so pale?"

The modern type-writing machine has the advantage of making all words
equally legible; but the receiver of the printed letter is likely to feel
on opening it a slight yet perceptible shock of the kind always caused by
a want of consideration. The letter so printed is undoubtedly easier to
read than all but the very clearest manuscript, and so far it may be
considered a politeness to use the instrument; but unluckily it is
impersonal, so that the performer on the instrument seems far removed from
the receiver of the letter and not in that direct communication with him
which would be apparent in an autograph. The effect on the mind is almost
like that of a printed circular, or at least of a letter which has been
dictated to a short-hand writer.

The dictation of letters is allowable in business, because men of business
have to use the utmost attainable despatch, and (like the use of the lead
pencil) it is permitted to invalids, but with these exceptions it is sure
to produce a feeling of distance almost resembling discourtesy. In the
first place, a dictated letter is not strictly private, its contents
being already known to the amanuensis; and besides this it is felt that
the reason for dictating letters is the composer's convenience, which he
ought not to consult so obviously. If he dictates to a short-hand writer
he is evidently chary of his valuable time, whereas courtesy always at
least _seems_ willing to sacrifice time to others. These remarks, I
repeat, have no reference to business correspondence, which has its own
code of good manners.

The most irritating letters to receive are those which, under a great show
of courtesy, with many phrases and many kind inquiries about your health
and that of your household, and even with some news adapted to your taste,
contain some short sentence which betrays the fact that the whole letter
was written with a manifestly selfish purpose. The proper answer to such
letters is a brief business answer to the one essential sentence that
revealed the writer's object, not taking any notice whatever of the froth
of courteous verbiage.

Is it a part of necessary good breeding to answer letters at all? Are we
really, in the nature of things, under the obligation to take a piece of
paper and write phrases and sentences thereupon because it has pleased
somebody at a distance to spend his time in that manner?

This requires consideration; there can be no general rule. It seems to me
that people commit the error of transferring the subject from the region
of oral conversation to the region of written intercourse. If a man asked
me the way in the street it would be rudeness on my part not to answer
him, because the answer is easily given and costs no appreciable time,
but in written correspondence the case is essentially different. I am
burdened with work; every hour, every minute of my day is apportioned to
some definite duty or necessary rest, and three strangers make use of the
post to ask me questions. To answer them I must make references; however
brief the letters may be they will take time,--altogether the three will
consume an hour. Have these correspondents any right to expect me to work
an hour for them? Would a cabman drive them about the streets of London
during an hour for nothing? Would a waterman pull them an hour on the
Thames for nothing? Would a shoe-black brush their boots and trousers an
hour for nothing? And why am I to serve these men gratuitously and be
called an ill-bred, discourteous person if I tacitly decline to be their
servant? We owe sacrifices--occasional sacrifices--of this kind to friends
and relations, and we can afford them to a few, but we are under no
obligation to answer everybody. Those whom we do answer may be thankful
for a word on a post-card in Gladstone's brief but sufficient fashion. I
am very much of the opinion of Rudolphe in Ponsard's "L'Honneur et
l'Argent." A friend asks him what he does about letters:--

    _Rudolphe._          Je les mets
  Soigneusement en poche et ne réponds jamais.
    _Premier Ami._      Oh! vous raillez.
    _Rudolphe._ Non pas. Je ne puis pas admettre
  Qu'un importun m'oblige à répondre à sa lettre,
  Et, parcequ'il lui plaît de noircir du papier
  Me condamne moi-même à ce fâcheux métier.




ESSAY XXIII.

LETTERS OF FRIENDSHIP.


If the art of writing had been unknown till now, and if the invention of
it were suddenly to burst upon the world as did that of the telephone, one
of the things most generally said in praise of it would be this. It would
be said, "What a gain to friendship, now that friends can communicate in
spite of separation by the very widest distances!"

Yet we have possessed this means of communication, the fullest and best of
all, from remote antiquity, and we scarcely make any use of it--certainly
not any use at all responding to its capabilities, and as time goes on,
instead of developing those capabilities by practice in the art of
friendly correspondence, we allow them to diminish by disuse.

The lowering of cost for the transport of letters, instead of making
friendly correspondents numerous, has made them few. The cheap
postage-stamp has increased business correspondence prodigiously, but it
has had a very different effect on that of friendship. Great numbers of
men whose business correspondence is heavy scarcely write letters of
friendship at all. Their minds produce the business letter as by a second
nature, and are otherwise sterile.

As for the facilities afforded by steam communication with distant
countries, they seem to be of little use to friendship, since a moderate
distance soon puts a stop to friendly communication. Except in cases of
strong affection the Straits of Dover are an effectual though imaginary
bar to intercourse of this kind, not to speak of the great oceans.

The impediment created by a narrow sea is, as I have said, imaginary, but
we may speculate on the reasons for it; and my own reflections have ended
in the somewhat strange conclusion that it must have something to do with
sea-sickness. It must be that people dislike the idea of writing a letter
that will have to cross a narrow channel of salt-water, because they
vaguely and dimly dread the motion of the vessel. Nobody would consciously
avow to himself such a sympathy with a missive exempt from all human ills,
but the feeling may be unconsciously present. How else are we to account
for the remarkable fact that salt-water breaks friendly communication by
letter? If you go to live anywhere out of your native island your most
intimate friends cease to give any news of themselves. They do not even
send printed announcements of the marriages and deaths in their families.
This does not imply any cessation of friendly feeling on their part. If
you appeared in England again they would welcome you with the utmost
kindness and hospitality, but they do not like to post anything that will
have to cross the sea. The news-vendors have not the same delicate
imaginative sympathy with the possible sufferings of rag-pulp, so you get
your English journals and find therein, by pure accident, the marriage of
one intimate old friend and the death of another. You excuse the married
man, because he is too much intoxicated with happiness to be responsible
for any omission; and you excuse the dead man, because he cannot send
letters from another world. Still you think that somebody not preoccupied
by bridal joys or impeded by the last paralysis might have sent you a line
directly, were it only a printed card.

Not only do the writers of letters feel a difficulty in sending their
manuscript across the sea, but people appear to have a sense of difficulty
in correspondence proportionate to the distance the letter will have to
traverse. One would infer that they really experience, by the power of
imagination, a feeling of fatigue in sending a letter on a long journey.
If this is not so, how are we to account for the fact that the rarity of
letters from friends increases in exact proportion to our remoteness from
them? A simple person without correspondence would naturally imagine that
it would be resorted to as a solace for separation, and that the greater
the distance the more the separated friends would desire to be drawn
together occasionally by its means, but in practice this rarely happens.
People will communicate by letter across a space of a hundred miles when
they will not across a thousand.

The very smallest impediments are of importance when the desire for
intercourse is languid. The cost of postage to colonies and to countries
within the postal union is trifling, but still it is heavier than the cost
of internal postage, and it may be unconsciously felt as an impediment.
Another slight impediment is that the answer to a letter sent to a great
distance cannot arrive next day, so that he who writes in hope of an
answer is like a trader who cannot expect an immediate return for an
investment.

To prevent friendships from dying out entirely through distance, the
French have a custom which seems, but is not, an empty form. On or about
New Year's Day they send cards to _all_ friends and many acquaintances,
however far away. The useful effects of this custom are the following:--

1. It acquaints you with the fact that your friend is still
alive,--pleasing information if you care to see him again.

2. It shows you that he has not forgotten you.

3. It gives you his present address.

4. In case of marriage, you receive his wife's card along with his own;
and if he is dead you receive no card at all, which is at least a negative
intimation.[32]

This custom has also an effect upon written correspondence, as the printed
card affords the opportunity of writing a letter, when, without the
address, the letter might not be written. When the address is well known
the card often suggests the idea of writing.

When warm friends send visiting-cards they often add a few words of
manuscript on the card itself, expressing friendly sentiments and giving a
scrap of brief but welcome news.

Here is a suggestion to a generation that thinks friendly letter-writing
irksome. With a view to the sparing of time and trouble, which is the
great object of modern life (sparing, that is, in order to waste in other
ways), cards might be printed as forms of invitation are, leaving only a
few blanks to be filled up; or there might be a public signal-book in
which the phrases most likely to be useful might be represented by
numbers.

The abandonment of letter-writing between friends is the more to be
regretted that, unless our friends are public persons, we receive no news
of them indirectly; therefore, when we leave their neighborhood, the
separation is of that complete kind which resembles temporary death. "No
word comes from the dead," and no word comes from those silent friends. It
is a melancholy thought in leaving a friend of this kind, when you shake
hands at the station and still hear the sound of his voice, that in a few
minutes he will be dead to you for months or years. The separation from a
corresponding friend is shorn of half its sorrows. You know that he will
write, and when he writes it requires little imagination to hear his voice
again.

To write, however, is not all. For correspondence to reach its highest
value, both friends must have the natural gift of friendly letter-writing,
which may be defined as the power of talking on paper in such a manner as
to represent their own minds with perfect fidelity in their friendly
aspect.

This power is not common. A man may be a charming companion, full of humor
and gayety, a well of knowledge, an excellent talker, yet his
correspondence may not reveal the possession of these gifts. Some men are
so constituted that as soon as they take a pen their faculties freeze. I
remember a case of the same congelation in another art. A certain painter
had exuberant humor and mimicry, with a marked talent for strong effects
in talk; in short, he had the gifts of an actor, and, as Pius VII. called
Napoleon I., he was both _commediante_ and _tragediante_. Any one who knew
him, and did not know his paintings, would have supposed at once that a
man so gifted must have painted the most animated works; but it so
happened (from some cause in the deepest mysteries of his nature) that
whenever he took up a brush or a pencil his humor, his tragic power, and
his love of telling effects all suddenly left him, and he was as timid,
slow, sober, and generally ineffectual in his painting as he was full of
fire and energy in talk. So it is in writing. That which ought to be the
pouring forth of a man's nature often liberates only a part of his nature,
and perhaps that part which has least to do with friendship. Your friend
delights you by his ease and affectionate charm of manner, by the
happiness of his expressions, by his wit, by the extent of his
information, all these being qualities that social intercourse brings out
in him as colors are revealed by light. The same man, in dull solitude at
his desk, may write a letter from which every one of these qualities may
be totally absent, and instead of them he may offer you a piece of
perfunctory duty-writing which, as you see quite plainly, he only wanted
to get done with, and in which you do not find a trace of your friend's
real character. Such correspondence as that is worth having only so far
as it informs you of your friend's existence and of his health.

Another and a very different way in which a man may represent himself
unfairly in correspondence, so that his letters are not his real self, is
when he finds that he has some particular talent as a writer, and
unconsciously cultivates that talent when he holds a pen, whereas his real
self has many other qualities that remain unrepresented. In this way humor
may become the dominant quality in the letters of a correspondent whose
conversation is not dominantly humorous.

Habits of business sometimes produce the effect that the confirmed
business correspondent will write to his friend willingly and promptly on
any matter of business, and will give him excellent advice, and be glad of
the opportunity of rendering him a service, but he will shrink from the
unaccustomed effort of writing any other kind of letter.

There is a strong temptation to blame silent friends and praise good
correspondents; but we do not reflect that letter-writing is a task to
some and a pleasure to others, and that if people may sometimes be justly
blamed for shirking a _corvée_ they can never deserve praise for indulging
in an amusement. There is a particular reason why, when friendly
letter-writing is a task, it is more willingly put off than many other
tasks that appear far heavier and harder. It is either a real pleasure or
a feigned pleasure, and feigned pleasures are the most wearisome things in
life, far more wearisome than acknowledged work. For in work you have a
plain thing to do and you see the end of it, and there is no need for
ambages at the beginning or for a graceful retiring at the close; but a
feigned pleasure has its own observances that must be gone through whether
one has any heart for them or not. The groom who cleans a rich man's
stable, and whistles at his work, is happier than the guest at a state
dinner who is trying to look other than what he is,--a wearied victim of
feigned and formal pleasure with a set false smile upon his face. In
writing a business letter you have nothing to affect; but a letter of
friendship, unless you have the real inspiration for it, is a narrative of
things you have no true impulse to narrate, and the expression of feelings
which (even if they be in some degree existent) you do not earnestly
desire to utter.

The sentiment of friendship is in general rather a quiet feeling of regard
than any lively enthusiasm. It may be counted upon for what it is,--a
disposition to receive the friend with a welcome or to render him an
occasional service, but there is not, commonly, enough of it to be a
perennial warm fountain of literary inspiration. Therefore the worst
mistake in dealing with a friend is to reproach him for not having been
cordial and communicative enough. Sometimes this reproach is made,
especially by women, and the immediate effect of it is to close whatever
communicativeness there may be. If the friend wrote little before being
reproached he will write less after.

The true inspiration of the friendly letter is the perfect faith that all
the concerns of the writer will interest his friend. If James, who is
separated by distance from John, thinks that John will not care about what
James has been doing, hoping, suffering, the fount of friendly
correspondence is frozen at its source. James ought to believe that John
loves him enough to care about every little thing that can affect his
happiness, even to the sickness of his old horse or the accident that
happened to his dog when the scullery-maid threw scalding water out of the
kitchen window; then there will be no lack, and James will babble on
innocently through many a page, and never have to think.

The believer in friendship, he who has the true undoubting faith, writes
with perfect carelessness about great things and small, avoiding neither
serious interests, as a wary man would, nor trivial ones that might be
passed over by a writer avaricious of his time. William of Orange, in his
letters to Bentinck, appears to have been the model of friendly
correspondents; and he was so because his letters reflected not a part
only of his thinking and living, but the whole of it, as if nothing that
concerned him could possibly be without interest for the man he loved.
Familiar as it must be to many readers, I cannot but quote a passage from
Macaulay:

    "The descendants of Bentinck still preserve many letters written by
    William to their master, and it is not too much to say that no person
    who has not studied those letters can form a correct notion of the
    Prince's character. He whom even his admirers generally accounted the
    most frigid and distant of men here forgets all distinctions of rank,
    and pours out all his thoughts with the ingenuousness of a schoolboy.
    He imparts without reserve secrets of the highest moment. He explains
    with perfect simplicity vast designs affecting all the governments of
    Europe. Mingled with his communications on such subjects are other
    communications of a very different but perhaps not of a less
    interesting kind. All his adventures, all his personal feelings, his
    long runs after enormous stags, his carousals on St. Hubert's Day, the
    growth of his plantations, the failure of his melons, the state of his
    stud, his wish to procure an easy pad-nag for his wife, his vexation
    at learning that one of his household, after ruining a girl of good
    family, refused to marry her, his fits of sea-sickness, his coughs,
    his headaches, his devotional moods, his gratitude for the Divine
    protection after a great escape, his struggles to submit himself to
    the Divine will after a disaster, are described with an amiable
    garrulity hardly to have been expected from the most discreetly sedate
    statesman of his age. Still more remarkable is the careless effusion
    of his tenderness, and the brotherly interest which he takes in his
    friend's domestic felicity."

Friendly letters easily run over from sheet to sheet till they become
ample and voluminous. I received a welcome epistle of twenty pages
recently, and have seen another from a young man to his comrade which
exceeded fifty; but the grandest letter that I ever heard of was from
Gustave Doré to a very old lady whom he liked. He was travelling in
Switzerland, and sent her a letter eighty pages long, full of lively
pen-sketches for her entertainment. Artists often insert sketches in their
letters,--a graceful habit, as it adds to their interest and value.

The talent for scribbling friendly letters implies some rough literary
power, but may coexist with other literary powers of a totally different
kind, and, as it seems, in perfect independence of them. There is no
apparent connection between the genius in "Childe Harold," "Manfred,"
"Cain," and the talent of a lively letter-writer, yet Byron was the best
careless letter-writer in English whose correspondence has been published
and preserved. He said "dreadful is the exertion of letter-writing," but
by this he must have meant the first overcoming of indolence to begin the
letter, for when once in motion his pen travelled with consummate
naturalness and ease, and the exertion is not to be perceived. The length
and subject of his communications were indeterminate. He scribbled on and
on, every passing mood being reflected and fixed forever in his letters,
which complete our knowledge of him by showing us the action of his mind
in ordinal times as vividly as the poems display its power in moments of
highest exaltation. We follow his mental phases from minute to minute. He
is not really in one state and pretending to be in another for form's
sake, so you have all his moods, and the letters are alive. The
transitions are quick as thought. He darts from one topic to another with
the freedom and agility of a bird, dwelling on each just long enough to
satisfy his present need, but not an instant longer, and this without any
reference to the original subject or motive of the letter. He is one of
those perfect correspondents _qui causent avec la plume_. Men, women, and
things, comic and tragic adventures, magnificent scenery, historical
cities, all that his mind spontaneously notices in the world, are touched
upon briefly, yet with consummate power. Though the sentences were written
in the most careless haste and often in the strangest situations, many a
paragraph is so dense in its substance, so full of matter, that one could
not abridge it without loss. But the supreme merit of Byron's letters is
that they record his own sensations with such fidelity. What do I, the
receiver of a letter, care for second-hand opinions about anything? I can
hear the fashionable opinions from echoes innumerable. What I _do_ want is
a bit of my friend himself, of his own peculiar idiosyncrasy, and if I get
_that_ it matters nothing that his feelings and opinions should be
different from mine; nay, the more they differ from mine the more
freshness and amusement they bring me. All Byron's correspondents might be
sure of getting a bit of the real Byron. He never describes anything
without conveying the exact effect upon himself. Writing to his publisher
from Rome in 1817, he gives in a single paragraph a powerful description
of the execution of three robbers by the guillotine (rather too terrible
to quote), and at the end of it comes the personal effect:--

    "The pain seems little, and yet the effect to the spectator and the
    preparation to the criminal are very striking and chilling. The first
    turned me quite hot and thirsty, and made me shake so that I could
    hardly hold the opera-glass (I was close, but was determined to see as
    one should see everything once, with attention); the second and third
    (which shows how dreadfully soon things grow indifferent), I am
    ashamed to say, had no effect on me as a horror, though I would have
    saved them if I could."

How accurately this experience is described with no affectation of
impassible courage (he trembles at first like a woman) or of becoming
emotion afterwards, the instant that the real emotion ceased! Only some
pity remains,--"I would have saved them if I could."

The bits of frank criticism thrown into his letters, often quite by
chance, were not the least interesting elements in Byron's
correspondence. Here is an example, about a book that had been sent him:--

    "Modern Greece--good for nothing; written by some one who has never
    been there, and, not being able to manage the Spenser stanza, has
    invented a thing of his own, consisting of two elegiac stanzas, an
    heroic line and an Alexandrine, twisted on a string. Besides, why
    _modern_? You may say _modern Greeks_, but surely _Greece_ itself is
    rather more ancient than ever it was."

The carelessness of Byron in letter-writing, his total indifference to
proportion and form, his inattention to the beginning, middle, and end of
a letter, considered as a literary composition, are not to be counted for
faults, as they would be in writings of any pretension. A friendly letter
is, by its nature, a thing without pretension. The one merit of it which
compensates for every defect is to carry the living writer into the
reader's presence, such as he really is, not such as by study and art he
might make himself out to be. Byron was energetic, impetuous, impulsive,
quickly observant, disorderly, generous, open-hearted, vain. All these
qualities and defects are as conspicuous in his correspondence as they
were in his mode of life. There have been better letter-writers as to
literary art,--to which he gave no thought,--and the literary merits that
his letters possess (their clearness, their force of narrative and
description, their conciseness) are not the results of study, but the
characteristics of a vigorous mind.

The absolutely best friendly letter-writer known to me is Victor
Jacquemont. He, too, wrote according to the inspiration of the moment, but
it was so abundant that it carried him on like a steadily flowing tide.
His letters are wonderfully sustained, yet they are not _composed_; they
are as artless as Byron's, but much more full and regular. Many scribblers
have facility, a flux of words, but who has Jacquemont's weight of matter
along with it? The development of his extraordinary epistolary talent was
due to another talent deprived of adequate exercise by circumstances.
Jacquemont was by nature a brilliant, charming, amiable talker, and the
circumstances were various situations in which this talker was deprived of
an audience, being often, in long wanderings, surrounded by dull or
ignorant people. Ideas accumulated in his mind till the accumulation
became difficult to bear, and he relieved himself by talking on paper to
friends at a distance, but intentionally only to one friend at a time. He
tried to forget that his letters were passed round a circle of readers,
and the idea that they would be printed never once occurred to him:--

    "En écrivant aujourd'hui aux uns et aux autres, j'ai cherché à oublier
    ce que tu me dis de l'échange que chacun fait des lettres qu'il reçoit
    de moi. Cette pensée m'aurait retenu la plume, ou du moins, _ne
    l'aurait pas laissée couler assez nonchalamment sur le papier pour en
    noircir, en un jour, cinquante-huit feuilles_, comme je l'ai fait....
    _Je sais et j'aime beaucoup causer à deux; à trois, c'est autre chose;
    il en est de même pour écrire._ Pour parler comme je pense et sans
    blague, _il me faut la persuasion que je ne serai lu que de celui à
    qui j'écris_."

To read these letters, in the four volumes of them which have been happily
preserved, is to live with the courageous observer from day to day, to
share pleasures enjoyed with the freshness of sensation that belongs to
youth and strength, and privations borne with the cheerfulness of a truly
heroic spirit.

This Essay would run to an inordinate length if I even mentioned the best
of the many letter-writers who are known to us; and it is generally by
some adventitious circumstance that they have ever been known at all. A
man wins fame in something quite outside of letter-writing, and then his
letters are collected and given to the world, but perfectly obscure people
may have been equal or superior to him as correspondents. Occasionally the
letters of some obscure person are rescued from oblivion. Madame de
Rémusat passed quietly through life, and is now in a blaze of posthumous
fame. Her son decided upon the publication of her letters, and then it
became at once apparent that this lady had extraordinary gifts of the
observing and recording order, so that her testimony, as an eye-witness of
rare intelligence, must affect all future estimates of the conqueror of
Austerlitz. There may be at this moment, there probably are, persons to
whom the world attributes no literary talent, yet who are cleverly
preserving the very best materials of history in careless letters to their
friends.

It seems an indiscretion to read private letters, even when they are in
print, but it is an indiscretion we cannot help committing. What can be
more private than a letter from a man to his wife on purely family
matters? Surely it is wrong to read such letters; but who could repent
having read that exquisite one from Tasso's father, Bernardo Tasso,
written to his wife about the education of their children during an
involuntary separation? It shows to what a degree a sheet of paper may be
made the vehicle of a tender affection. In the first page he tries, and,
lover-like, tries again and again, to find words that will draw them
together in spite of distance. "Not merely often," he says, "but
continually our thoughts must meet upon the road." He expresses the
fullest confidence that her feelings for him are as strong and true as his
own for her, and that the weariness of separation is painful alike for
both, only he fears that she will be less able to bear the pain, not
because she is wanting in prudence but by reason of her abounding love. At
length the tender kindness of his expressions culminates in one passionate
outburst, "poi ch' io amo voi in quello estremo grado che si possa amar
cosa mortale."

It would be difficult to find a stronger contrast than that between
Bernardo Tasso's warmth and the tranquil coolness of Montaigne, who just
says enough to save appearances in that one conjugal epistle of his which
has come down to us. He begins by quoting a sceptical modern view of
marriage, and then briefly disclaims it for himself, but does not say
exactly what his own sentiments may be, not having much ardor of affection
to express, and honestly avoiding any feigned declarations:--

    "Ma Femme vous entendez bien que ce n'est pas le tour d'vn galand
    homme, aux reigles de ce temps icy, de vous courtiser & caresser
    encore. Car ils disent qu'vn habil homme peut bien prendre femme: mais
    que de l'espouser c'est à faire à vn sot. Laissons les dire: ie me
    tiens de ma part à la simple façon du vieil aage, aussi en porte-ie
    tantost le poil. Et de vray la nouuelleté couste si cher iusqu'à
    ceste heure à ce pauure estat (& si ie ne sçay si nous en sommes à la
    dernière enchere) qu'en tout & par tout i'en quitte le party. Viuons
    ma femme, vous & moy, à la vieille Françoise."

If friendship is maintained by correspondence, it is also liable to be
imperilled by it. Not unfrequently have men parted on the most amiable
terms, looking forward to a happy meeting, and not foreseeing the evil
effects of letters. Something will be written by one of them, not quite
acceptable to the other, who will either remonstrate and cause a rupture
in that way, or take his trouble silently and allow friendship to die
miserably of her wound. Much experience is needed before we entirely
realize the danger of friendly intercourse on paper. It is ten times more
difficult to maintain a friendship by letter than by personal intercourse,
not for the obvious reason that letter-writing requires an effort, but
because as soon as there is the slightest divergence of views or
difference in conduct, the expression of it or the account of it in
writing cannot be modified by kindness in the eye or gentleness in the
tone of voice. My friend may say almost anything to me in his private
room, because whatever passes his lips will come with tones that prove him
to be still my friend; but if he wrote down exactly the same words, and a
postman handed me the written paper, they might seem hard, unkind, and
even hostile. It is strange how slow we are to discover this in practice.
We are accustomed to speak with great freedom to intimate friends, and it
is only after painful mishaps that we completely realize the truth that it
is perilous to permit ourselves the same liberty with the pen. As soon as
we _do_ realize it we see the extreme folly of those who timidly avoid the
oral expression of friendly censure, and afterwards write it all out in
black ink and send it in a missive to the victim when he has gone away. He
receives the letter, feels it to be a cold cruelty, and takes refuge from
the vexations of friendship in the toils of business, thanking Heaven that
in the region of plain facts there is small place for sentiment.




ESSAY XXIV.

LETTERS OF BUSINESS.


The possibilities of intercourse by correspondence are usually
underestimated.

That there are great natural differences of talent for letter-writing is
certainly true; but it is equally true that there are great natural
differences of talent for oral explanation, yet, although we constantly
hear people say that this or that matter of business cannot be treated by
correspondence, we _never_ hear them say that it cannot be treated by
personal interviews. The value of the personal interview is often as much
over-estimated as that of letters is depreciated; for if some men do best
with the tongue, others are more effective with the pen.

It is presumed that there is nothing in correspondence to set against the
advantages of pouring forth many words without effort, and of carrying on
an argument rapidly; but the truth is, that correspondence has peculiar
advantages of its own. A hearer seldom grasps another person's argument
until it has been repeated several times, and if the argument is of a very
complex nature the chances are that he will not carry away all its points
even then. A letter is a document which a person of slow abilities can
study at his leisure, until he has mastered it; so that an elaborate
piece of reasoning may be set forth in a letter with a fair chance that
such a person will ultimately understand it. He will read the letter three
or four times on the day of its arrival, then he will still feel that
something may have escaped him, and he will read it again next day. He
will keep it and refer to it afterwards to refresh his memory. He can do
nothing of all this with what you say to him orally. His only resource in
that case is to write down a memorandum of the conversation on your
departure, in which he will probably make serious omissions or mistakes.
Your letter is a memorandum of a far more direct and authentic kind.

Appointments are sometimes made in order to settle a matter of business by
talking, and after the parties have met and talked for a long time one
says to the other, "I will write to you in a day or two;" and the other
instantly agrees with the proposal, from a feeling that the matter can be
settled more clearly by letter than by oral communication.

In these cases it may happen that the talking has cleared the way for the
letter,--that it has removed subjects of doubt, hesitation, or dispute,
and left only a few points on which the parties are very nearly agreed.

There are, however, other cases, which have sometimes come under my own
observation, in which men meet by appointment to settle a matter, and then
seem afraid to cope with it, and talk about indifferent subjects with a
half-conscious intention of postponing the difficult one till there is no
longer time to deal with it on that day. They then say, when they
separate, "We will settle that matter by correspondence," as if they could
not have done so just as easily without giving themselves the trouble of
meeting. In such cases as these the reason for avoiding the difficult
subject is either timidity or indolence. Either the parties do not like to
face each other in an opposition that may become a verbal combat, or else
they have not decision and industry enough to do a hard day's work
together; so they procrastinate, that they may spread the work over a
larger space of time.

The timidity that shrinks from a personal encounter is sometimes the cause
of hostile letter-writing about matters of business even when personal
interviews are most easy. There are instances of disputes by letter
between people who live in the same town, in the same street, and even in
the same house, and who might quarrel with their tongues if they were not
afraid, but fear drives them to fight from a certain distance, as it
requires less personal courage to fire a cannon at an enemy a league away
than to face his naked sword.

Timidity leads people to write letters and to avoid them. Some timorous
people feel bolder with a pen; others, on the contrary, are extremely
afraid of committing anything to paper, either because written words
remain and may be referred to afterwards, or because they may be read by
eyes they were never intended for, or else because the letter-writer feels
doubtful about his own powers in composition, grammar, or spelling.

Of these reasons against doing business by letter the second is really
serious. You write about your most strictly private affairs, and unless
the receiver of the letter is a rigidly careful and orderly person, it may
be read by his clerks or servants. You may afterwards visit the recipient
and find the letter lying about on a disorderly desk, or stuck on a hook
suspended from a wall, or thrust into a lockless drawer; and as the letter
is no longer your property, and you have not the resource of destroying
it, you will keenly appreciate the wisdom of those who avoid
letter-writing when they can.

The other cause of timidity, the apprehension that some fault may be
committed, some sin against literary taste or grammatical rule, has a
powerful effect as a deterrent from even necessary business
correspondence. The fear which a half-educated person feels that he will
commit faults causes a degree of hesitation which is enough of itself to
produce them; and besides this cause of error there is the want of
practice, also caused by timidity, for persons who dread letter-writing
practise it as little as possible.

The awkwardness of uneducated letter-writers is a most serious cause of
anxiety to people who are compelled to intrust the care of things to
uneducated dependants at a distance. Such care-takers, instead of keeping
you regularly informed of the state of affairs as an intelligent
correspondent would, write rarely, and they have such difficulty in
imagining the necessary ignorance of one who is not on the spot, that the
information they give you is provokingly incomplete on some most important
points.

An uneducated agent will write to you and tell you, for example, that
damage has occurred to something of yours, say a house, a carriage, or a
yacht, but he will not tell you its exact nature or extent, and he will
leave you in a state of anxious conjecture. If you question him by letter,
he will probably miss what is most essential in your questions, so that
you will have great difficulty in getting at the exact truth. After much
trouble you will perhaps have to take the train and go to see the extent
of damage for yourself, though it might have been described to you quite
accurately in a short letter by an intelligent man of business.

Nothing is more wonderful than the mistakes in following written
directions that can be committed by uneducated men. With clear directions
in the most legible characters before their eyes they will quietly go and
do something entirely different, and appear unfeignedly surprised when you
show them the written directions afterwards. In these cases it is probable
that they have unconsciously substituted a notion of their own for your
idea, which is the common process of what the uneducated consider to be
understanding things.

The extreme facility with which this is done may be illustrated by an
example. The well-known French _savant_ and inventor, Ruolz, whose name is
famous in connection with electro-plating, turned his attention to paper
for roofing and, as he perceived the defects of the common bituminous
papers, invented another in which no bitumen was employed. This he
advertised constantly and extensively as the "Carton _non_ bitumé Ruolz,"
consequently every one calls it the "Carton bitumé Ruolz." The reason here
is that the notion of papers for roofs was already so associated in the
French mind with bitumen, that it was absolutely impossible to effect the
disjunction of the two ideas.

Instances have occurred to everybody in which the consequence of warning a
workman that he is not to do some particular thing, is that he goes and
does it, when if nothing had been said on the subject he might, perchance,
have avoided it. Here are two good instances of this, but I have met with
many others. I remember ordering a binder to bind some volumes with red
edges, specially stipulating that he was not to use aniline red. He
therefore carefully stained the edges with aniline. I also remember
writing to a painter that he was to stain some new fittings of a boat with
a transparent glaze of raw sienna, and afterwards varnish them, and that
he was to be careful _not_ to use opaque paint anywhere. I was at a great
distance from the boat and could not superintend the work. In due time I
visited the boat and discovered that a foul tint of opaque paint had been
employed everywhere on the new fittings, without any glaze or varnish
whatever, in spite of the fact that old fittings, partially retained, were
still there, with mellow transparent stain and varnish, in the closest
juxtaposition with the hideous thick new daubing.

It is the evil of mediocrity in fortune to have frequently to trust to
uneducated agents. Rich men can employ able representatives, and in this
way they can inform themselves accurately of what occurs to their
belongings at a distance. Without riches, however, we may sometimes have a
friend on the spot who will see to things for us, which is one of the
kindest offices of friendship. The most efficient friend is one who will
not only look to matters of detail, but will take the trouble to inform
you accurately about them, and for this he must be a man of leisure. Such
a friend often spares one a railway journey by a few clear lines of report
or explanation. Judging from personal experience, I should say that
retired lawyers and retired military officers were admirably adapted to
render this great service efficiently, and I should suppose that a man who
had retired from busy commercial life would be scarcely less useful, but I
should not hope for precision in one who had always been unoccupied, nor
should I expect many details from one who was much occupied still. The
first would lack training and experience; the second would lack leisure.

The talent for accuracy in affairs may be distinct from literary talent
and education, and though we have been considering the difficulty of
corresponding on matters of business with the uneducated, we must not too
hastily infer that because a man is inaccurate in spelling, and inelegant
in phraseology, he may not be an agreeable and efficient business
correspondent. There was a time when all the greatest men of business in
England were uncertain spellers. Clear expression and completeness of
statement are more valuable than any other qualities in a business
correspondent. I sometimes have to correspond with a tradesman in Paris
who rose from an humble origin and scarcely produces what a schoolmaster
would consider a passable letter; yet his letters are models in essential
qualities, as he always removes by plain statements or questions every
possibility of a mistake, and if there is any want of absolute precision
in my orders he is sure to find out the deficiency, and to call my
attention to it sharply.

The habit of _not acknowledging orders_ is one of the worst negative vices
in business correspondence. It is most inconveniently common in France,
but happily much rarer in England. Where this vice prevails you cannot
tell whether the person you wish to employ has read your order or not; and
if you suppose him to have read it, you have no reason to feel sure that
he has understood it, or will execute it in time.

It is a great gain to the writer of letters to be able to make them brief
and clear at the same time, but as there is obscurity in a labyrinth of
many words so there may be another kind of obscurity from their
paucity,--that kind which Horace alluded to with reference to poetry,--

    "Brevis esse laboro
  Obscurus fio."

Sometimes one additional word would spare the reader a doubt or a
misunderstanding. This is likely to become more and more the dominant
fault of correspondence as it imitates the brevity of the telegram.

Observe the interesting use of the word _laboro_ by Horace. You may, in
fact, _labor_ to be brief, although the result is an appearance of less
labor than if you had written at ease. It may take more time to write a
very short letter than one of twice the length, the only gain in this
case being to the receiver.

Letters of business often appear to be written in the most rapid and
careless haste; the writing is almost illegible from its speed, the
composition slovenly, the letter brief. And yet such a letter may have
cost hours of deliberate reflection before one word of it was committed to
paper. It is the rapid registering of a slowly matured decision.

It is a well-known principle of modern business correspondence that if a
letter refers only to one subject it is more likely to receive attention
than if it deals with several; therefore if you have several different
orders or directions to give it is bad policy to write them all at once,
unless you are absolutely compelled to do so because they are all equally
pressing. Even if there is the same degree of urgency for all, yet a
practical impossibility that all should be executed at the same time, it
is still the best policy to give your orders successively and not more
quickly than they can be executed. The only danger of this is that the
receiver of the orders may think at first that they are small matters in
which postponement signifies little, as they can be executed at any time.
To prevent this he should be strongly warned at first that the order will
be rapidly followed by several others. If there is not the same degree of
urgency for all, the best way is to make a private register of the
different matters in the order of their urgency, and then to write several
short notes, at intervals, one about each thing.

People have such a marvellous power of misunderstanding even the very
plainest directions that a business letter never _can_ be made too clear.
It will, indeed, frequently happen that language itself is not clear
enough for the purposes of explanation without the help of drawing, and
drawing may not be clear to one who has not been educated to understand
it, which compels you to have recourse to modelling. In these cases the
task of the letter-writer is greatly simplified, as he has nothing to do
but foresee and prevent any misunderstanding of the drawing or model.

Every material thing constructed by mankind may be explained by the three
kinds of mechanical drawing,--plan, section, and elevation,--but the
difficulty, is that so many people are unable to understand plans and
sections; they only understand elevations, and not always even these. The
special incapacity to understand plans and sections is common in every
rank of society, and it is not uncommon even in the practical trades. All
letter-writing that refers to material construction would be immensely
simplified if, by a general rule in popular and other education, every
future man and woman in the country were taught enough about mechanical
drawing to be able at least to _read_ it.

It is delightful to correspond about construction with any trained
architect or engineer, because to such a correspondent you can explain
everything briefly, with the perfect certainty of being accurately
understood. It is terrible toil to have to explain construction by letter
to a man who does not understand mechanical drawing; and when you have
given great labor to your explanation, it is the merest chance whether he
will catch your meaning or not. The evil does not stop at mechanical
drawing. Not only do uneducated people misunderstand a mechanical plan or
section, but they are quite as liable to misunderstand a perspective
drawing, as the great architect and draughtsman Viollet-le-Duc charmingly
exemplified by the work of an intelligent child. A little boy had drawn a
cat as he had seen it in front with its tail standing up, and this front
view was stupidly misunderstood by a mature _bourgeois_, who thought the
animal was a biped (as the hind-legs were hidden), and believed the erect
tail to be some unknown object sticking out of the nondescript creature's
head. If you draw a board in perspective (other than isometrical) a
workman is quite likely to think that one end of it is to be narrower than
the other.

Business correspondence in foreign languages is a very simple matter when
it deals only with plain facts, and it does not require any very extensive
knowledge of the foreign tongue to write a common order; but if any
delicate or complicated matter has to be explained, or if touchy
sensitiveness in the foreigner has to be soothed by management and tact,
then a thorough knowledge of the shades of expression is required, and
this is extremely rare. The statement of bare facts, or the utterance of
simple wants, is indeed only a part of business correspondence, for men of
business, though they are not supposed to display sentiment in affairs,
are in reality just as much human beings as other men, and consequently
they have feelings which are to be considered. A correspondent who is able
to write a foreign language with delicacy and tact will often attain his
object when one with a ruder and more imperfect knowledge of the language
would meet with certain failure, though he asked for exactly the same
thing.

It is surety possible to be civil and even polite in business
correspondence without using the deplorable commercial slang which exists,
I believe, in every modern language. The proof that such abstinence is
possible is that some of the most efficient and most active men of
business never have recourse to it at all. This commercial slang consists
in the substitution of conventional terms originally intended to be more
courteous than plain English, French, etc., but which, in fact, from their
mechanical use, become wholly destitute of that best politeness which is
personal, and does not depend upon set phrases that can be copied out of a
tradesman's model letter-writer. Anybody but a tradesman calls your letter
a letter; why should an English tradesman call it "your favor," and a
French one "_votre honorée_"? A gentleman writing in the month of May
speaks of April, May, and June, when a tradesman carefully avoids the
names of the months, and calls them _ultimo_, _courant_, and _proximo_;
whilst instead of saying "by" or "according to," like other Englishmen, he
says _per_. This style was touched upon by Scott in Provost Crosbie's
letter to Alexander Fairford: "Dear Sir--Your _respected favor_ of 25th
_ultimo_, _per_ favor of Mr. Darsie Latimer, reached me in safety." This
is thought to be a finished commercial style. One sometimes meets with the
most astonishing and complicated specimens of it, which the authors are
evidently proud of as proofs of their high commercial training. I regret
not to have kept some fine examples of these, as their perfections are far
beyond all imitation. This is not surprising when we reflect that the very
worst commercial style is the result of a striving by many minds, during
several generations, after a preposterous ideal.

Tradesmen deserve credit for understanding the one element of courtesy in
letter-writing which has been neglected by gentlemen. They value legible
handwriting, and they print clear names and addresses on their
letter-paper, by which they spare much trouble.

Before closing this chapter let me say something about the reading of
business letters as well as the writing of them. It is, perhaps, a harder
duty to read such letters with the necessary degree of attention than to
compose them, for the author has his head charged with the subject, and
writing the letter is a relief to him; but to the receiver the matter is
new, and however lucid may be the exposition it always requires some
degree of real attention on his part. How are you, being at a distance, to
get an indolent man to bestow that necessary attention? He feels secure
from a personal visit, and indulges his indolence by neglecting your
concerns, even when they are also his own. Long ago I heard an English
Archdeacon tell the following story about his Bishop. The prelate was one
of that numerous class of men who loathe the sight of a business letter;
and he had indulged his indolence in that respect to such a degree that,
little by little, he had arrived at the fatal stage where one leaves
letters unopened for days or weeks. At one particular time the Archdeacon
was aware of a great arrear of unopened letters, and impressed his
lordship with the necessity for taking some note of their contents.
Yielding to a stronger will, the Bishop began to read; and one of the
first communications was from a wealthy man who offered a large sum for
church purposes (I think for building), but if the offer was not accepted
within a certain lapse of time he declared his intention of making it to
that which a Bishop loveth not--a dissenting community. The prelate had
opened the letter too late, and he lost the money. I believe that the
Archdeacon's vexation at the loss was more than counterbalanced by
gratification that his hierarchical superior had received such a lesson
for his neglect. Yet he did but imitate Napoleon, of whom Emerson says,
"He directed Bourrienne to leave all letters unopened for three weeks, and
then observed with satisfaction how large a part of the correspondence had
disposed of itself and no longer required an answer." This is a very
unsafe system to adopt, as the case of the Bishop proves. Things may
"dispose of themselves" in the wrong way, like wine in a leaky cask,
which, instead of putting itself carefully into a sound cask, goes
trickling into the earth.

The indolence of some men in reading and answering letters of business
would be incredible if they did not give clear evidence of it. The most
remarkable example that ever came under my notice is the following. A
French artist, not by any means in a condition of superfluous prosperity,
exhibited a picture at the _Salon_. He waited in Paris till after the
opening of the exhibition and then went down into the country. On the day
of his departure he received letters from two different collectors
expressing a desire to purchase his work, and asking its price. Any real
man of business would have seized upon such an opportunity at once. He
would have answered both letters, stayed in town, and contrived to set the
two amateurs bidding against each other. The artist in question was one of
those unaccountable mortals who would rather sacrifice all their chances
of life than indite a letter of business, so he left both inquiries
unanswered, saying that if the men had really wanted the picture they
would have called to see him. He never sold it, and some time afterwards
was obliged to give up his profession, quite as much from the lack of
promptitude in affairs as from any artistic deficiency.

Sometimes letters of business are _read_, but read so carelessly that it
would be better if they were thrown unopened into the fire. I have seen
some astounding instances of this, and, what is most remarkable, of
repeated and incorrigible carelessness in the same person or firm,
compelling one to the conclusion that in corresponding with that person or
that firm the clearest language, the plainest writing, and the most
legible numerals, are all equally without effect. I am thinking
particularly of one case, intimately known to me in all its details, in
which a business correspondence of some duration was finally abandoned,
after infinite annoyance, for the simple reason that it was impossible to
get the members of the firm, or their representatives, to attend to
written orders with any degree of accuracy. Even whilst writing this very
Essay I have given an order with regard to which I foresaw a probable
error. Knowing by experience that a probable error is almost certain if
steps are not taken energetically to prevent it, I requested that this
error might not be committed, and to attract more attention to my request
I wrote the paragraph containing it in red ink,--a very unusual
precaution. The foreseen error was accurately committed.




ESSAY XXV.

ANONYMOUS LETTERS.


Probably few of my mature readers have attained middle age without
receiving a number of anonymous letters. Such letters are not always
offensive, sometimes they are amusing, sometimes considerate and kind, yet
there is in all cases a feeling of annoyance on receiving them, because
the writer has made himself inaccessible to a reply. It is as if a man in
a mask whispered a word in your ear and then vanished suddenly in a crowd.
You wish to answer a calumny or acknowledge a kindness, and you may talk
to the winds and streams.

Anonymous letters of the worst kind have a certain value to the student of
human nature, because they afford him glimpses of the evil spirit that
disguises itself under the fair seemings of society. You believe with
childlike simplicity and innocence that, as you have never done any
intentional injury to a human being, you cannot have a human enemy, and
you make the startling discovery that somewhere in the world, perhaps even
amongst the smiling people you meet at dances and dinners, there are
creatures who will have recourse to the foulest slanders if thereby they
may hope to do you an injury. What _can_ you have done to excite such
bitter animosity? You may both have done much and neglected much. You may
have had some superiority of body, mind, or fortune; you may have
neglected to soothe some jealous vanity by the flattery it craved with a
tormenting hunger.

The simple fact that you seem happier than Envy thinks you ought to be is
of itself enough to excite a strong desire to diminish your offensive
happiness or put an end to it entirely. That is the reason why people who
are going to be married receive anonymous letters. If they are not really
happy they have every appearance of being happy, which is not less
intolerable. The anonymous letter-writer seeks to put a stop to such a
state of things. He might go to one of the parties and slander the other
openly, but it would require courage to do that directly to his face. A
