letter might be written, but if name and address were given there would
come an inconvenient demand for proofs. One course remains, offering that
immunity from consequences which is soothing to the nerves of a coward.
The envious or jealous man can throw his vitriol in the dark and slip away
unperceived--_he can write an anonymous letter_.

Has the reader ever really tried to picture to himself the state of that
man's or woman's mind (for women write these things also) who can sit
down, take a sheet of paper, make a rough draft of an anonymous letter,
copy it out in a very legible yet carefully disguised hand, and make
arrangements for having it posted at a distance from the place where it
was written? Such things are constantly done. At this minute there are a
certain number of men and women in the world who are vile enough to do
all that simply in order to spoil the happiness of some person whom they
regard with "envy, hatred, malice, and all uncharitableness." I see in my
mind's eye the gentleman--the man having all the apparent delicacy and
refinement of a gentleman--who is writing a letter intended to blast the
character of an acquaintance. Perhaps he meets that acquaintance in
society, and shakes hands with him, and pretends to take an interest in
his health. Meanwhile he secretly reflects upon the particular sort of
calumny that will have the greatest degree of verisimilitude. Everything
depends upon his talent in devising the most _credible_ sort of
calumny,--not the calumny most likely to meet general credence, but that
which is most likely to be believed by the person to whom it is addressed,
and most likely to do injury when believed. The anonymous calumniator has
the immense advantage on his side that most people are prone to believe
evil, and that good people are unfortunately the most prone, as they hate
evil so intensely that even the very phantom of it arouses their anger,
and they too frequently do not stop to inquire whether it is a phantom or
a reality. The clever calumniator is careful not to go too far; he will
advance something that might be or that might have been; he does not love
_le vrai_, but he is a careful student of _le vraisemblable_. He will
assume an appearance of reluctance, he will drop hints more terrible than
assertions, because they are vague, mysterious, disquieting. When he
thinks he has done enough he stops in time; he has inoculated the drop of
poison, and can wait till it takes effect.

It must be rather an anxious time for the anonymous letter-writer when he
has sent off his missive. In the nature of things he cannot receive an
answer, and it is not easy for him to ascertain very soon what has been
the result of his enterprise. If he has been trying to prevent a marriage
he does not know immediately if the engagement is broken off, and if it is
not broken off he has to wait till the wedding-day before he is quite sure
of his own failure, and to suffer meanwhile from hope deferred and
constantly increasing apprehension. If the rupture occurs he has a moment
of Satanic joy, but it _may_ be due to some other cause than the success
of his own calumny, so that he is never quite sure of having himself
attained his object.

It is believed that most people who are engaged to be married receive
anonymous letters recommending them to break off the match. Not only are
such letters addressed to the betrothed couple themselves, but also to
their relations. If there is not a doubt that the statements in such
letters are purely calumnious, the right course is to destroy them
immediately and never allude to them afterwards; but if there is the
faintest shadow of a doubt--if there is the vaguest feeling that there may
be _some_ ground for the attack--then the only course is to send the
letter to the person accused, and to say that this is done in order to
afford him an opportunity for answering the anonymous assailant. I
remember a case in which this was done with the best results. A
professional man without fortune was going to marry a young heiress; I do
not mean a great heiress, but one whose fortune might be a temptation.
Her family received the usual anonymous letters, and in one of them it was
stated that the aspirant's father, who had been long dead, had dishonored
himself by base conduct with regard to a public trust in a certain town
where he occupied a post of great responsibility towards the municipal
authorities. The letter was shown to the son, and he was asked if he knew
anything of the matter, and if he could do anything to clear away the
imputation. Then came the difficulty that the alleged betrayal of trust
was stated to have occurred twenty years before, and that the Mayor was
dead, and probably most of the common councillors also. What was to be
done? It is not easy to disprove a calumny, and the _onus_ of proof ought
always to be thrown upon the calumniator, but this calumniator was
anonymous and intangible, so the son of the victim was requested to repel
the charge. By a very unusual and most fortunate accident, his father had
received on quitting the town in question a letter from the Mayor of a
most exceptional character, in which he spoke with warm and grateful
appreciation of services rendered and of the happy relations of trust and
confidence that had subsisted between himself and the slandered man down
to the very termination of their intercourse. This letter, again by a most
lucky accident, had been preserved by the widow, and by means of it one
dead man defended the memory of another. It removed the greatest obstacle
to the marriage; but another anonymous writer, or the same in another
handwriting, now alleged that the slandered man had died of a disease
likely to be inherited by his posterity. Here, again, luck was on the
side of the defence, as the physician who had attended him was still
alive, so that this second invention was as easily disposed of as the
first. The marriage took place; it has been more than usually happy, and
the children are pictures of health.

The trouble to which anonymous letter-writers put themselves to attain
their ends must sometimes be very great. I remember a case in which some
of these people must have contrived by means of spies or agents to procure
a private address in a foreign country, and must have been at great pains
also to ascertain certain facts in England which were carefully mingled
with the lies in the calumnious letter. The nameless writer was evidently
well informed, possibly he or she may have been a "friend" of the intended
victim. In this case no attention was paid to the attack, which did not
delay the marriage by a single hour. Long afterwards the married pair
happened to be talking about anonymous letters, and it then appeared that
each side had received several of these missives, coarsely or ingeniously
concocted, but had given them no more attention than they deserved.

An anonymous letter is sometimes written in collaboration by two persons
of different degrees of ability. When this is done one of the slanderers
generally supplies the basis of fact necessary to give an appearance of
knowledge, and the other supplies or improves the imaginative part of the
common performance and its literary style. Sometimes one of the two may be
detected by the nature of the references to fact, or by the supposed
writer's personal interest in bringing about a certain result.

It is very difficult at the first glance entirely to resist the effect of
a clever anonymous letter, and perhaps it is only men of clear strong
sense and long experience who at once overcome the first shock. In a very
short time, however, the phantom evil grows thin and disappears, and the
motive of the writer is guessed at or discerned.

The following brief anonymous letter or one closely resembling it (I quote
from memory) was once received by an English gentleman on his travels.

    "DEAR SIR,--I congratulate you on the fact that you will be a
    grandfather in about two months. I mention this as you may like to
    purchase baby-linen for your grandchild during your absence. I am,
    Sir, yours sincerely,

        "A WELL-WISHER."

The receiver had a family of grown-up children of whom not one was
married. The letter gave him a slight but perceptible degree of
disquietude which he put aside to the best of his ability. In a few days
came a signed letter from one of his female servants confessing that she
was about to become a mother, and claiming his protection as the
grandfather of the child. It then became evident that the anonymous letter
had been written by the girl's lover, who was a tolerably educated man
whilst she was uneducated, and that the pair had entered into this little
plot to obtain money. The matter ended by the dismissal of the girl, who
then made threats until she was placed in the hands of the police. Other
circumstances were recollected proving her to be a remarkably audacious
liar and of a slanderous disposition.

The torture that an anonymous letter may inflict depends far more on the
nature of the person who receives it than on the circumstances it relates.
A jealous and suspicious nature, not opened by much experience or
knowledge of the world, is the predestined victim of the anonymous
torturer. Such a nature jumps at evil report like a fish at an artificial
fly, and feels the anguish of it immediately. By a law that seems really
cruel such natures seize with most avidity on those very slanders that
cause them the most pain.

A kind of anonymous letter of which we have heard much in the present
disturbed state of European society is the letter containing threats of
physical injury. It informs you that you will be "done for" or "disabled"
in a short time, and exhorts you in the meanwhile to prepare for your
awful doom. The object of these letters is to deprive the receiver of all
feeling of security or comfort in existence. His consolation is that a
real intending murderer would probably be thinking too much of his own
perilous enterprise to indulge in correspondence about it, and we do not
perceive that the attacks on public men are at all proportionate in number
to the menaces addressed to them.

As there are malevolent anonymous letters intended to inflict the most
wearing anxiety, so there are benevolent ones written to save our souls.
Some theologically minded person, often of the female sex, is alarmed for
our spiritual state because she fears that we have doubts about the
supernatural, and so she sends us books that only make us wonder at the
mental condition for which such literature can be suitable. I remember one
of my female anonymous correspondents who took it for granted that I was
like a ship drifting about without compass or rudder (a great mistake on
her part), and so she offered me the safe and spacious haven of
Swedenborgianism! Others will tell you of the "great pain" with which they
have read this or that passage of your writings, to which an author may
always reply that as there is no Act of Parliament compelling British
subjects to read his books the sufferers have only to let them alone in
order to spare themselves the dolorous sensations they complain of.

Some kind anonymous correspondents write to console us for offensive
criticism by maintaining the truth of our assertions as supported by their
own experience. I remember that when the novel of "Wenderholme" was
published, and naturally attacked for its dreadful portraiture of the
drinking habits of a past generation, a lady wrote to me anonymously from
a locality of the kind described bearing mournful witness to the veracity
of the description.[33] In this case the employment of the anonymous form
was justified by two considerations. There was no offensive intention, and
the lady had to speak of her own relations whose names she desired to
conceal. Authors frequently receive letters of gently expressed criticism
or remonstrance from readers who do not give their names. The only
objection to these communications, which are often interesting, is that it
is rather teasing and vexatious to be deprived of the opportunity for
answering them. The reader may like to see one of these gentle anonymous
letters. An unmarried lady of mature age (for there appears to be no
reason to doubt the veracity with which she gives a slight account of
herself) has been reading one of my books and thinks me not quite just to
a most respectable and by no means insignificant class in English society.
She therefore takes me to task,--not at all unkindly.

    "DEAR SIR,--I have often wished to thank you for the intense pleasure
    your books have given me, especially the 'Painter's Camp in the
    Highlands,' the word-pictures of which reproduced the enjoyment,
    intense even to pain, of the Scottish scenery.

    "I have only now become acquainted with your 'Intellectual Life,'
    which has also given me great pleasure, though of another kind. Its
    general fairness and candor induce me to protest against your judgment
    of a class of women whom I am sure you underrate from not having a
    sufficient acquaintance with their capabilities.

    "'_Women who are not impelled by some masculine influence are not
    superior, either in knowledge or in discipline of the mind, at the age
    of fifty to what they were at twenty-five.... The best illustration of
    this is a sisterhood of three or four rich old maids.... You will
    observe that they invariably remain, as to their education, where they
    were left by their teachers many years before.... Even in what most
    interests them--theology, they repeat but do not extend their
    information._'

    "My circle of acquaintance is small, nevertheless I know many women
    between twenty-five and forty whose culture is always steadily
    progressing; who keep up an acquaintance with literature for its own
    sake, and not 'impelled' thereto 'by masculine influence;' who, though
    without creative power, yet have such capability of reception that
    they can appreciate the best authors of the day; whose theology is not
    quite the fossil you represent it, though I confess it is for but a
    small number of my acquaintance that I can claim the power of
    judicially estimating the various schools of theology.

    "Without being specialists, the more thoughtful of our class have such
    an acquaintance with current literature that they are able to enter
    into the progress of the great questions of the day, and may even
    estimate the more fairly a Gladstone or a Disraeli for being
    spectators instead of actors in politics.

    "I have spoken of my own acquaintances, but they are such as may be
    met within any middle-class society. For myself, I look back to the
    painful bewilderment of twenty-five and contrast it with satisfaction
    with the brighter perceptions of forty, finding out 'a little more,
    and yet a little more, of the eternal order of the universe.' One
    reason for your underrating us may be that our receptive powers only
    are in constant use, and we have little power of expression. I dislike
    anonymous letters as a rule, but as I write as the representative of a
    class, I beg to sign myself,

        "Yours gratefully,
            "ONE OF THREE OR FOUR RICH OLD MAIDS.

    "_November 13, 1883._"

Letters of this kind give no pain to the receiver, except when they compel
him to an unsatisfactory kind of self-examination. In the present case I
make the best amends by giving publicity and permanence to this clearly
expressed criticism. Something may be said, too, in defence of the
passages incriminated. Let me attempt it in the form of a letter which may
possibly fall under the eye of the Rich Old Maid.

    DEAR MADAM,--Your letter has duly reached me, and produced feelings of
    compunction. Have I indeed been guilty of injustice towards a class so
    deserving of respect and consideration as the Rich Old Maids of
    England? It has always seemed to me one of the privileges of my native
    country that such a class should flourish there so much more amply and
    luxuriantly than in other lands. Married women are absorbed in the
    cares and anxieties of their own households, but the sympathies of old
    maids spread themselves over a wider area. Balzac hated them, and
    described them as having souls overflowing with gall; but Balzac was a
    Frenchman, and if he was just to the rare old maids of his native
    country (which I cannot believe) he knew nothing of the more numerous
    old maids of Great Britain. I am not in Balzac's position. Dear
    friends of mine, and dearer relations, have belonged to that kindly
    sisterhood.

    The answer to your objection is simple. "The Intellectual Life" was
    not published in 1883 but in 1873. It was written some time before,
    and the materials had been gradually accumulating in the author's mind
    several years before it was written. Consequently your criticism is of
    a much later date than the work you criticise, and as you are forty in
    1883 you were a young maid in the times I was thinking of when
    writing. It is certainly true that many women of the now past
    generation, particularly those who lived in celibacy, had a remarkable
    power of remaining intellectually in the same place. This power is
    retained by some of the present generation, but it is becoming rarer
    every day because the intellectual movement is so strong that it is
    drawing a constantly increasing number of women along with it; indeed
    this movement is so accelerated as to give rise to a new anxiety, and
    make us look back with a wistful regret. We are now beginning to
    perceive that a certain excellent old type of Englishwomen whom we
    remember with the greatest affection and respect will soon belong as
    entirely to the past as if they had lived in the days of Queen
    Elizabeth. From the intellectual point of view their lives were hardly
    worth living, but we are beginning to ask ourselves whether their
    ignorance (I use the plain term) and their prejudices (the plain term
    again) were not essential parts of a whole that commanded our respect.
    Their simplicity of mind may have been a reason why they had so much
    simplicity of purpose in well-doing. Their strength of prejudice may
    have aided them to keep with perfect steadfastness on the side of
    moral and social order. Their intellectual restfulness in a few clear
    settled ideas left a degree of freedom to their energy in common
    duties that may not always be possible amidst the bewildering theories
    of an unsettled and speculative age.

        Faithfully yours,
            THE AUTHOR OF "THE INTELLECTUAL LIFE."




ESSAY XXVI.

AMUSEMENTS.


One of the most unexpected discoveries that we make on entering the
reflective stage of existence is that amusements are social obligations.

The next discovery of this kind is that the higher the rank of the person
the more obligatory and the more numerous do his so-called "amusements"
become, till finally we reach the princely life which seems to consist
almost exclusively of these observances.

Why should it ever be considered obligatory upon a man to amuse himself in
some way settled by others? There appear to be two principal reasons for
this. The first is, that when amusements are practised by many persons in
common it appears unsociable and ungracious to abstain. Even if the
amusement is not interesting in itself it is thought that the society it
leads us into ought to be a sufficient reason for following it.

The second reason is that, like all things which are repeated by many
people together, amusements soon become fixed customs, and have all the
weight and authority of customs, so that people dare not abstain from
observing them for fear of social penalties.

If the amusements are expensive they become not only a sign of wealth but
an actual demonstration and display of it, and as nothing in the world is
so much respected as wealth, or so efficient a help to social position,
and as the expenditure which is visible produces far more effect upon the
mind than that which is not seen, it follows that all costly amusements
are useful for self-assertion in the world, and become even a means of
maintaining the political importance of great families.

On the other hand, not to be accustomed to expensive amusements implies
that one has lived amongst people of narrow means, so that most of those
who have social ambition are eager to seize upon every opportunity for
enlarging their experience of expensive amusements in order that they may
talk about them afterwards, and so affirm their position as members of the
upper class.

The dread of appearing unsociable, of seeming rebellious against custom,
or inexperienced in the habits of the rich, are reasons quite strong
enough for the maintenance of customary amusements even when there is very
little real enjoyment of them for their own sake.

But, in fact, there are always _some_ people who practise these amusements
for the sake of the pleasure they give, and as these people are likely to
excel the others in vivacity, activity, and skill, as they have more
_entrain_ and gayety, and talk more willingly and heartily about the
sports they love, so they naturally come to lead opinion upon the subject
and to give it an appearance of earnestness and warmth that is beyond its
real condition. Hence the tone of conversation about amusements, though it
may accurately represent the sentiments of those who enjoy them, does not
represent all opinion fairly. The opposite side of the question found a
witty exponent in Sir George Cornewall Lewis, when he uttered that
immortal saying by which his name will endure when the recollection of his
political services has passed away,--"How tolerable life would be were it
not for its pleasures!" There you have the feeling of the thousands who
submit and conform, but who would have much to say if it were in good
taste to say anything against pleasures that are offered to us in
hospitality.

Amusements themselves become work when undertaken for an ulterior purpose
such as the maintenance of political influence. A great man goes through a
certain regular series of dinners, balls, games, shooting and hunting
parties, races, wedding-breakfasts, visits to great houses, excursions on
land and water, and all these things have the outward appearance of
amusement, but may, in reality, be labors that the great man undertakes
for some purpose entirely outside of the frivolous things themselves. A
Prime Minister scarcely goes beyond political dinners, but what an endless
series of engagements are undertaken by a Prince of Wales! Such things are
an obligation for him, and when the obligation is accepted with unfailing
patience and good temper, the Prince is not only working, but working with
a certain elegance and grace of art, often involving that prettiest kind
of self-sacrifice which hides itself under an appearance of enjoyment.
Nobody supposes that the social amusements so regularly gone through by
the eldest son of Queen Victoria can be, in all cases, very entertaining
to him; we suppose them to be accepted as forms of human intercourse that
bring him into personal relations with his future subjects. The difference
between this Prince and King Louis II. of Bavaria is perhaps the most
striking contrast in modern royal existences. Prince Albert Edward is
accessible to everybody, and shares the common pleasures of his
countrymen; the Bavarian sovereign is never so happy as when in one of his
romantic and magnificent residences, surrounded by the sublimity of nature
and the embellishments of art, he sits alone and dreams as he listens to
the strains of exquisite music. Has he not erected his splendid castle on
a rock, like the builder of "The Palace of Art"?

  "A huge crag-platform, smooth as burnish'd brass
       I chose. The ranged ramparts bright
   From level meadow-bases of deep grass
       Suddenly scaled the light.

  "Thereon I built it firm. Of ledge or shelf
       The rock rose clear, or winding stair.
   My soul would live alone unto herself
       In her high palace there."

The life of the King of Bavaria, sublimely serene in its independence, is
a long series of tranquil omissions. There may be a wedding-feast in one
of his palaces, but such an occurrence only seems to him the best of all
reasons why he should be in another. He escapes from the pleasures and
interests of daily life, making himself an earthly paradise of
architecture, music, and gardens, and lost in his long dream, assuredly
one of the most poetical figures in the biographies of kings, and one of
the most interesting, but how remote from men! This remoteness is due, in
great part, to a sincerity of disposition which declines amusements that
do not amuse, and desires only those real pleasures which are in perfect
harmony with one's own nature and constitution. We like the sociability,
the ready human sympathy, of the Prince of Wales; we think that in his
position it is well for him to be able to keep all that endless series of
engagements, but has not King Louis some claim upon our indulgence even in
his eccentricity? He has refused the weary round of false amusements and
made his choice of ideal pleasure. If he condescended to excuse himself,
his _Apologia pro vitâ sua_ might take a form somewhat resembling this. He
might say, "I was born to a great fortune and only ask leave to enjoy it
in my own way. The world's amusements are an infliction that I consider
myself at liberty to avoid. I love musical or silent solitude, and the
enchantments of a fair garden and a lofty dwelling amidst the glorious
Bavarian mountains. Let the noisy world go its way with its bitter
wranglings, its dishonest politics, its sanguinary wars! I set up no
tyranny. I leave my subjects to enjoy their brief human existence in their
own fashion, and they let me dream my dream."

These are not the world's ways nor the world's view. The world considers
it essential to the character of a prince that he should be at least
apparently happy in those pleasures which are enjoyed in society, that he
should seem to enjoy them along with others to show his fellow-feeling
with common men, and not sit by himself, like King Louis in his theatre,
when "Tannhauser" is performed for the royal ears alone.

Of the many precious immunities that belong to humble station there are
none more valuable than the freedom from false amusements. A poor man is
under one obligation, he must work, but his work itself is a blessed
deliverance from a thousand other obligations. He is not obliged to shoot,
and hunt, and dance against his will, he is not obliged to affect interest
and pleasure in games that only weary him, he has not to receive tiresome
strangers in long ceremonious repasts when he would rather have a simple
short dinner with his wife. Béranger sang the happiness of beggars with
his sympathetic humorous philosophy, but in all seriousness it might be
maintained that the poor are happier than they know. They get their easy
unrestrained human intercourse by chance meetings, and greetings, and
gossipings, and they are spared all the acting, all the feigning, that is
connected with the routine of imposed enjoyments.

Avowed work, even when uncongenial, is far less trying to patience than
feigned pleasure. You dislike accounts and you dislike balls, but though
your dislike may be nearly equal in both cases you will assuredly find
that the time hangs less heavily when you are resolutely grappling with
the details of your account-books than when you are only wishing that the
dancers would go to bed. The reason is that any hard work, whatever it is,
has the qualities of a mental tonic, whereas unenjoyed pleasures have an
opposite effect, and even though work may be uncongenial you see a sort
of result, whilst a false pleasure leaves no result but the extreme
fatigue that attends it,--a kind of fatigue quite exceptional in its
nature, and the most disagreeable that is known to man.

The dislike for false amusements is often misunderstood to be a
puritanical intolerance of all amusement. It is in this as in all things
that are passionately enjoyed,--the false thing is most disliked by those
who best appreciate the true.

What may be called the truth or falsehood of amusements is not in the
amusements themselves, but in the relation between one human idiosyncrasy
and them. Every idiosyncrasy has its own strong mysterious affinities,
generally distinguishable in childhood, always clearly distinguishable in
youth. We are like a lute or a violin, the tuned strings vibrate in answer
to certain notes but not in answer to others.

To convert amusements into social customs or obligations, to make it a
man's duty to shoot birds or ride after foxes because it is agreeable to
others to discharge guns and gallop across fields, is an infringement of
individual liberty which is less excusable in the case of amusements than
it is in more serious things. For in serious things, in politics and
religion, there is always the plausible argument that the repression of
the individual conscience is good for the unity of the State; whereas
amusements are supposed to exist for the recreation of those who practise
them, and when they are not enjoyed they are not amusements but something
else. There is no single English word that exactly expresses what they
are, but there is a French one, the word _corvée_, which means forced
labor, labor under dictation, all the more unpleasant in these cases that
it must assume the appearance of enjoyment.[34]

Surely there is nothing in which the independence of the individual ought
to be so absolute, so unquestioned, as in amusements. What right have I,
because a thing is a pleasant pastime to me, to compel my friend or my son
to do that thing when it is a _corvée_ to him? No man can possibly amuse
himself in obedience to a word of command, the most he can do is to
submit, to try to appear amused, wishing all the time that the weary task
was over.

To mark the contrast clearly I will describe some amusements from the
opposite points of view of those who enjoy them naturally, and those to
whom they would be indifferent if they were not imposed, and hateful if
they were.

Shooting is delightful to genuine sportsmen in many ways. It renews in
them the sensations of the vigorous youth of humanity, of the tribes that
lived by the chase. It brings them into contact with nature, gives a zest
and interest to hard pedestrian exercise, makes the sportsmen minutely
acquainted with the country, and leads to innumerable observations of the
habits of wild animals that have the interest without the formal
pretensions of a science. Shooting is a delightful exercise of skill,
requiring admirable promptitude and perfect nerve, so that any success in
it is gratifying to self-esteem. Sir Samuel Baker is always proud of
being such a good marksman, and frankly shows his satisfaction. "I had
fired three _beautifully correct_ shots with No. 10 bullets, and seven
drachms of powder in each charge; these were so nearly together that they
occupied a space in her forehead of about three inches." He does not aim
at an animal in a general way, but always at a particular and penetrable
spot, recording each hit, and the special bullet used. Of course he loves
his guns. These modern instruments are delightful toys on account of the
highly developed art employed in their construction, so that they would be
charming things to possess, and handle, and admire, even if they were
never used, whilst the use of them gives a terrible power to man. See a
good marksman when he takes a favorite weapon in his hand! More
redoubtable than Roland with the sword Durindal, he is comparable rather
to Apollo with the silver bow, or even to Olympian Zeus himself grasping
his thunders. Listen to him when he speaks of his weapon! If he thinks you
have the free-masonry of the chase, and can understand him, he talks like
a poet and lover. Baker never fails to tell us what weapon he used on each
occasion, and how beautifully it performed, and due honor and
advertisement are kindly given to the maker, out of gratitude.

    "I accordingly took my trusty little Fletcher double rifle No. 24, and
    running knee-deep into the water to obtain a close shot I fired
    exactly between the eyes near the crown of the head. At the reports of
    the little Fletcher the hippo disappeared."

Then he adds an affectionate foot-note about the gun, praising it for
going with him for five years, as if it had had a choice about the matter,
and could have offered its services to another master. He believes it to
be alive, like a dog.

    "This excellent and handy rifle was made by Thomas Fletcher, of
    Gloucester, and accompanied me like a faithful dog throughout my
    journey of nearly five years to the Albert Nyanza, and returned with
    me to England as good as new."

In the list of Baker's rifles appears his bow of Ulysses, his Child of a
Cannon, familiarly called the Baby, throwing a half-pound explosive shell,
a lovely little pet of a weapon with a recoil that broke an Arab's
collar-bone, and was not without some slight effect even upon that mighty
hunter, its master.

    "Bang went the Baby; round I spun like a weather-cock with the blood
    flowing from my nose, as the recoil had driven the top of the hammer
    deep into the bridge. My Baby not only screamed but kicked viciously.
    However I knew the elephant would be bagged, as the half-pound shell
    had been aimed directly behind the shoulder."

We have the most minute descriptions of the effects of these projectiles
in the head of a hippopotamus and the body of an elephant. "I was quite
satisfied with my explosive shells," says the enthusiastic sportsman, and
the great beasts appear to have been satisfied too.

Now let me attempt to describe the feelings of a man not born with the
natural instinct of a sportsman. We need not suppose him to be either a
weakling or a coward. There are strong and brave men who can exercise
their strength and prove their courage without willingly inflicting wounds
or death upon any creature. To some such men a gun is simply an
encumbrance, to wait for game is a wearisome trial of patience, to follow
it is aimless wandering, to slaughter it is to do the work of a butcher or
a poulterer, to wound it is to incur a degree of remorse that is entirely
destructive of enjoyment. The fact that somewhere on mountain or in forest
poor creatures are lying with festering flesh or shattered bones to die
slowly in pain and hunger, and the terrible thirst of the wounded, and all
for the pleasure of a gentleman,--such a fact as that, when clearly
realized, is not to be got over by anything less powerful than the genuine
instinct of the sportsman who is himself one of Nature's own born
destroyers, as panthers and falcons are. The feeling of one who has not
the sporting instinct has been well expressed as follows by Mr. Lewis
Morris, in "A Cynic's Day-dream:"--

  "Scant pleasure should I think to gain
   From endless scenes of death and pain;
   'Twould little profit me to slay
   A thousand innocents a day;
   I should not much delight to tear
   With wolfish dogs the shrieking hare;
   With horse and hound to track to death
   A helpless wretch that gasps for breath;
   To make the fair bird check its wing,
   And drop, a dying, shapeless thing;
   To leave the joy of all the wood
   A mangled heap of fur and blood,
   Or else escaping, but in vain,
   To pine, a shattered wretch, in pain;
   Teeming, perhaps, or doomed to see
   Its young brood starve in misery."

Hunting may be classed with shooting and passed over, as the instinct is
the same for both, with this difference only that the huntsman has a
natural passion for horsemanship that may be wanting to the pedestrian
marksman. An amusement entirely apart from every other, and requiring a
special instinct, is that of sailing.

If you have the nautical passion it was born with you, and no reasoning
can get it out of you. Every sheet of navigable water draws you with a
marvellous attraction, fills you with an indescribable longing. Miles away
from anything that can be sailed upon, you cannot feel a breeze upon your
cheek without wishing to be in a sailing-boat to catch it in a spread of
canvas. A ripple on a duck-pond torments you with a teazing reminder of
larger surfaces, and if you had no other field for navigation you would
want to be on that duck-pond in a tub. "I would rather have a plank and a
handkerchief for a sail," said Charles Lever, "than resign myself to give
up boating." You have pleasure merely in being afloat, even without
motion, and all the degrees of motion under sail have their own peculiar
charm for you, from an insensible gliding through glassy waters to a fight
against opposite winds and raging seas. You have a thorough, intimate, and
affectionate knowledge of all the details of your ship. The constant
succession of little tasks and duties is an unfailing interest, a
delightful occupation. You enjoy the manual labor, and acquire some skill
not only as a sailor but as ship's carpenter and painter. You take all
accidents and disappointments cheerfully, and bear even hardship with a
merry heart. Nautical exercise, though on the humble scale of the modest
amateur, has preserved or improved your health and activity, and brought
you nearer to Nature by teaching you the habits of the winds and waters
and by displaying to you an endless variety of scenes, always with some
fresh interest, and often of enchanting beauty.

Now let us suppose that you are simple enough to think that what pleases
you, who have the instinct, will gratify another who is destitute of it.
If you have power enough to make him accompany you, he will pass through
the following experiences.

Try to realize the fact that to him the sailing-boat is only a means of
locomotion, and that he will refer to his watch and compare it with other
means of locomotion already known to him, not having the slightest
affectionate prejudice in its favor or gentle tolerance of its defects. If
you could always have a steady fair wind he would enjoy the boat as much
as a coach or a very slow railway train, but he will chafe at every delay.
None of the details that delight you can have the slightest interest for
him. The sails, and particularly the cordage, seem to him an irritating
complication which, he thinks, might be simplified, and he will not give
any mental effort to master them. He cares nothing about those qualities
of sails and hull which have been the subject of such profound scientific
investigation, such long and passionate controversy. You cannot speak of
anything on board without employing technical terms which, however
necessary, however unavoidable, will seem to him a foolish and useless
affectation by which an amateur tries to give himself nautical airs. If
you say "the mainsheet" he thinks you might have said more rationally and
concisely "the cord by which you pull towards you that long pole which is
under the biggest of the sails," and if you say "the starboard quarter,"
he thinks you ought to have said, in simple English, "that part of the
vessel's side that is towards the back end of it and to your right hand
when you are standing with your face looking forwards." If you happen to
be becalmed he suffers from an infinite _ennui_. If you have to beat to
windward he is indifferent to the wonderful art and vexed with you
because, as his host, you have not had the politeness and the forethought
to provide a favorable breeze. If you are a yachtsman of limited means and
your guest has to take a small share in working the vessel, he will not
perform it with any cheerful alacrity, but consider it unfit for a
gentleman. If this goes on for long it is likely that there will be
irritation on both sides, snappish expressions, and a quarrel. Who is in
fault? Both are excusable in the false situation that has been created,
but it ought not to have been created at all. You ought not to have
invited a man without nautical instincts, or he ought not to have accepted
the invitation. He was a charming companion on land, and that misled you
both. Meet him on land again, receive him hospitably at your house. I
would say "forgive him!" if there were anything to forgive, but it is not
any fault of his or any merit of yours if, by the irrevocable fate of
congenital idiosyncrasy, the amusement that you were destined to seek and
enjoy is the _corvée_ that he was destined to avoid.

I find no language strong enough to condemn the selfishness of those who,
in order that they may enjoy what is a pleasure to themselves,
deliberately and knowingly inflict a _corvée_ upon others. This objection
does not apply to paid service, for that is the result of a contract.
Servants constantly endure the tedium of waiting and attendance, but it is
their form of work, and they have freely undertaken it. Work of that kind
is not a _corvée_, it is not forced labor. Real _corvées_ are inflicted by
heads of families on dependent relations, or by patrons on humble friends
who are under some obligation to them, and so bound to them as to be
defenceless. The father or patron wants, let us say, his nightly game at
whist; he must and will have it, if he cannot get it he feels that the
machine of the universe is out of gear. He singles out three people who do
not want to play, perhaps takes for his partner one who thoroughly
dislikes the game, but who has learned something of it in obedience to his
orders. They sit down to their board of green cloth. The time passes
wearily for the principal victim, who is thinking of something else and
makes mistakes. The patron loses his temper, speaks with increasing
acerbity, and finally either flies into a passion and storms (the
old-fashioned way), or else adopts, with grim self-control, a tone of
insulting contempt towards his victim that is even more difficult to
endure. And this is the reward for having been unselfish and obliging,
these are the thanks for having sacrificed a happy evening!

If this is often done by individuals armed with some kind of power and
authority, it is done still more frequently by majorities. The tyranny of
majorities begins in our school-days, and the principal happiness of
manhood is in some measure to escape from it. Many a man in after-life
remembers with bitterness the weary hours he had to spend for the
gratification of others in games that he disliked. The present writer has
a vivid recollection of what, to him, was the infinite dulness of cricket.
He was not by any means an inactive boy, but it so happened that cricket
never had the slightest interest for him, and to this day he cannot pass a
cricket-ground without a feeling of strong antipathy to its level surface
of green, and of thankfulness that he is no longer compelled to go through
the irksome old _corvée_ of his youth. One of the many charms, to his
taste, of a rocky mountain-side in the Highlands is that cricket is
impossible there. At the same time he quite believes and admits everything
that is so enthusiastically claimed for cricket by those who have a
natural affinity for the game.

There are not only sports and pastimes, but there is the long
reverberating echo of every sport in endless conversations. Here it may be
remarked that the lovers of a particular amusement, when they happen to be
a majority, possess a terrible power of inflicting _ennui_ upon others,
and they often exercise it without mercy. Five men are dining together,
and three are fox-hunters. Evidently they ought to keep fox-hunting to
themselves in consideration for the other two, but this requires an almost
superhuman self-discipline and politeness, so there is a risk that the
minority may have to submit in silence to an inexhaustible series of
details about horses and foxes and dogs. Indeed you are never safe from
this kind of conversation, even when you have numbers on your side.
Sporting talk may be inflicted by a minority when that minority is
incapable of any other conversation and strong in its own incapacity. Here
is a case in point that was narrated to me by one of the three _convives_.
The host was a country gentleman of great intellectual attainments, one
guest was a famous Londoner, and the other was a sporting squire who had
been invited as a neighbor. Fox-hunting was the only subject of talk,
because the squire was garrulous and unable to converse about any other
topic.

Ladies are often pitiable sufferers from this kind of conversation.
Sometimes they have the instinct of masculine sport themselves, and then
the subject has an interest for them; but an intelligent woman may find
herself in a wearisome position when she would rather avoid the subject of
slaughter, and all the men around her talk of nothing but killing and
wounding.

It is natural that men should talk much about their amusements, because
the mere recollection of a true amusement (that for which we have an
affinity) is in itself a renewal of it in imagination, and an immense
refreshment to the mind. In the midst of a gloomy English winter the
yachtsman talks of summer seas, and whilst he is talking he watches,
mentally, his well-set sails, and hears the wash of the Mediterranean
wave.

There are three pleasures in a true amusement, first anticipation, full of
hope, which is

  "A feast for promised triumph yet to come,"

often the best banquet of all. Then comes the actual fruition, usually
dashed with disappointments that a true lover of the sport accepts in the
most cheerful spirit. Lastly, we go through it all over again, either with
the friends who have shared our adventures or at least with those who
could have enjoyed them had they been there, and who (for vanity often
claims her own delights) know enough about the matter to appreciate our
own admirable skill and courage.

In concluding this Essay I desire to warn young readers against a very
common mistake. It is very generally believed that literature and the fine
arts can be happily practised as amusements. I believe this to be an error
due to the vulgar notion that artists and literal people do not work but
only display talent, as if anybody could display talent without toil.
Literary and artistic pursuits are in fact _studies_ and not amusements.
Too arduous to have the refreshing quality of recreation, they put too
severe a strain upon the faculties, they are too troublesome in their
processes, and too unsatisfactory in their results, unless a natural gift
has been developed by earnest and long-continued labor. It does indeed
occasionally happen that an artist who has acquired skill by persistent
study will amuse himself by exercising it in sport. A painter may make
idle sketches as Byron sometimes broke out into careless rhymes, or as a
scholar will playfully compose doggerel in Greek, but these gambols of
accomplished men are not to be confounded with the painful efforts of
amateurs who fancy that they are going to dance in the Palace of Art and
shortly discover that the muse who presides there is not a smiling
hostess but a severe and exigent schoolmistress. An able French painter,
Louis Leloir, wrote thus to a friend about another art that he felt
tempted to practise:--

    "Etching tempts me much. I am making experiments and hope to show you
    something soon. Unhappily life is too short; we do a little of
    everything and then perceive that each branch of art would of itself
    consume the life of a man, to practise it very imperfectly after
    all.... We get angry with ourselves and struggle, but too late. It was
    at the beginning that we ought to have put on blinkers to hide from
    ourselves everything that is not art."

If we mean to amuse ourselves let us avoid the painful wrestling against
insuperable difficulties, and the humiliation of imperfect results. Let us
shun all ostentation, either of wealth or talent, and take our pleasures
happily like poor children, or like the idle angler who stands in his old
clothes by the purling stream and watches the bobbing of his float, or the
glancing of the fly that his guileful industry has made.




INDEX.


  Absinthe, French use, 273.

  Absurdity, in languages, 157.

  Academies, in a university, 275.

  Accidents, Divine connection with (Essay XV.), 218-222.

  Acquaintances: new and humble, 21, 22;
    chance, 23-26;
    met in travelling (Essay XVII.), 239-252 _passim_.

  Adaptability: a mystery, 9;
    in life's journey, 44;
    to unrefined people, 72.

  Adultery, overlooked in princes, 168.

  Affection: not blinding to faults, 10;
    how to obtain filial, 98;
    in the beginning of letters, 316.

  Affinities, mysterious, 288.

  Age: affecting human intercourse, ix;
    outrun by youth, 86-93 _passim_;
    affecting friendship, 112;
    senility hard to convince, 293, 294;
    middle and old, 302;
    kind letter to an old lady, 345.

  Agnosticism, affecting filial relations, 93.

  Agriculture: under law, 228;
    and Radicals, 282.

  Albany, Duke of, his associations, 5.

  Albert Nyanza, Baker's exploits, 392.

  Alexis, Prince, sad relations to his father, 95, 96.

  Alps: first sight, 235;
    grandeur, 271.

  Americans: artistic attraction, 8;
    inequalities of wealth, 248;
    behaviour towards strangers, 249;
    treated as ignorant by the English, 277;
    under George III., 279;
    use of ruled paper, 328.

  Amusements: pursuit of, 27;
    sympathy with youthful, 88;
    out-door, 302, 303;
    praise for indulgence not deserved, 342;
    in general (Essay XXVI.), 383-401;
    obligatory, 383;
    expensive and pleasurable, 384;
    laborious, 385;
    princely enjoyments, 386, 387;
    poverty not compelled to practise, 388;
    feigned, 388, 389;
    converted into customs, 389;
    should be independent in, 390;
    shooting, 391-393;
    boating, 394-396;
    selfish compulsion, 397;
    tyranny of majorities, 398;
    conversational echoes, 398, 399;
    ladies not interested, 399;
    three stages of pleasure, 399, 400;
    artistic gambols, 400;
    to be taken naturally and happily, 401.

  Analysis: important to prevent confusion (Essay XX.), 280-294 _passim_;
    analytical faculty wanting, 280, 292-294.

  Ancestry: aristocratic, 123;
    boast, 130;
    home, 138;
    less religion, 214.

  Angels, and the arts, 191.

  Anglicanism, and Russian Church, 257, 258.

  Angling, pleasure of, 401.

  Animals, feminine care, 177.

  Annuities, affecting family ties, 68, 69.

  Answers to letters, 334, 335.

  Anticipation, pleasure of, 399, 400.

  Antiquarianism, author's, 323.

  Apollo, a sportsman compared to, 391.

  Arabs: use of telegraph, 323;
    collar-bone broken, 392.

  Archæology: a friend's interest, x;
    affected by railway travel, 14.

  Architecture: illustration, vii, xii;
    studies in France, 17, 23, 24;
    connection with religion, 189, 190, 192;
    ignorance about English, 265;
    common mistakes, 291;
    letters about, 365.

  Aristocracy: French rural, 18, 19;
    English laws of primogeniture, 66;
    English instance, 123, 124;
    discipline, 128;
    often poor, 135, 136;
    effect of deference, 146, 147;
    a mark of? 246, 247;
    Norman influence, 251, 252;
    antipathy, to Dissent, 256, 257;
    sent to Eton, 277;
    and Bohemianism, 309;
    dislike of scholarship, 331, 332.
    (See _Rank_.)

  Aristophilus, fictitious character, 146.

  Armies: national ignorance, 277-279;
    monopoly of places in French, 283.
    (See _War_.)

  Art: detached from religion, xii;
    affecting friendship, 6, 8;
    Claude and Turner, 13;
    chance acquaintances, 23, 24;
    purposes lowered, 28, 29;
    penetrated by love, 42, 43;
    affecting fraternity, 64;
    friendship, 113, 114;
    lifts above mercenary motives, 132;
    literary, 154;
    adaptability of Greek language, 158;
    preferences of artists rewarded, 165;
    affecting relations of Priests and Women (Essay XIII. part II.),
        187-195, _passim_;
    exaggeration and diminution, both admissible, 232, 233;
    result of selection, 253;
    French ignorance of English, 265, 266, 267;
    antagonized by Philistinism, 285, 286, 301;
    not mere amusement, 400.
    (See _Painting_, _Sculpture_, _Turner_, etc.)

  Asceticism, tinges both the Philistine and Bohemian, 299, 300.
    (See _Priesthood_, _Roman Catholicism_, etc.)

  Association: pleasurable or not, 3;
    affected by opinions, 5, 6;
    by tastes, 7, 8;
    London, 20;
    of a certain French painter, 28;
    between Priests and Women (Essay XIII. part III.), 195-204 _passim_;
    among travellers (Essay XVII.), 239-252;
    leads to misapprehension of opinions, 287, 288.
    (See _Companionship_, _Friendship_, _Society_, etc.)

  Atavism, puzzling to parents, 88.

  Atheism: reading prayers, 163;
    apparent, 173;
    confounded with Deism, 257.
    (See _God_, _Religion_, etc.)

  Attention: how directed in the study of language, 154;
    want of, 197.

  Austerlitz, battle, 350.
    (See _Napoleon I._)

  Austria, Empress, 180.

  Authority, of fathers (Essay VI.), 78-98 _passim_.
    (See _Priests_.)

  Authors: illustration, 9;
    indebtedness to humbler classes, 22, 23;
    relations of several to women, 46 _et seq._;
    sensitiveness to family indifference, 74;
    in society and with the pen, 237, 238;
    a procrastinating correspondent, 317;
    anonymous letters, 378.
    (See _Hamerton_, etc.)

  Authorship, illustrating interdependence, 12.
    (See _Literature_, etc.)

  Autobiographies, revelations of faithful family life, 65.

  Autumn tints, 233.

  Avignon, France, burial-place of Mill, 53.


  Bachelors: independence, 26;
    dread of a wife's relations, 73;
    lonely hearth, 76;
    friendship destroyed by marriage, 115, 116;
    reception into society, 120;
    eating-habits, 244.
    (See _Marriage_, _Wives_, etc.)

  Baker, Sir Samuel, shooting, 390-392.

  Balzac, his hatred of old maids, 381.

  Baptism, religious influence, 184, 185.
    (See _Priesthood_.)

  Baptists: in England, 170;
    ignorance about, 257.
    (See _Religion_.)

  Barbarism, emerging from, 161.
    (See _Civilization_.)

  Baronius, excerpts by Prince Alexis, 95.

  Barristers, mercenary motives, 132, 133.

  Bavaria, king of, 385-387.

  Bazaar, charity, 188.

  Beard, not worn by priests, 202.

  Beauty: womanly attraction, 38, 39;
    sought by wealth, 299.

  Bedford, Duke of, knowledge of French, 151.

  Belgium, letters written at the date of Waterloo, 153.

  Beljame, his knowledge of English, 152.

  Bell, Umfrey, in old letter, 323.

  Benevolence, priestly and feminine association therein, 195, 196.
    (See _Priests_, etc.)

  Ben Nevis, and other Scotch heights, 271.

  Bentinck, William, letters to, 344, 345.

  Betham-Edwards, Amelia, her description of English bad manners, 240, 245.

  Bible: faith in, 6;
    allusion to Proverbs and Canticles, 41;
    reading, 123;
    Babel, 159;
    commentaries studied, authority, 206;
    examples, 208;
    narrow limits, 211, 212;
    commentaries and sermons, 302.
    (See _Religion_, etc.)

  Bicycle, illustration, 15.

  Birds, in France, 272.

  Birth, priestly connection with, 184, 185.
    (See _Priests_, _Women_.)

  Black cap, illustration, 204.

  Blake, William, quotation about Folly and Wisdom, 31.

  Blasphemy, royal, 167.
    (See _Immorality_, etc.)

  Boating: affected by railways, 14;
    French river, 128;
    rich and poor, 138, 139;
    comparison, 154;
    Lever's experience, 260;
    mistaken judgments, 292, 293;
    not enjoyed, 302;
    sleeping, 307;
    on the Thames, 335;
    painting a boat, 359;
    amusement, 394-396.
    (See _Yachts_, etc.)

  Boccaccio, quotation about pestilence, 222.

  Bohemianism: Noble (Essay XXI.), 295-314;
    unjust opinions, 295;
    lower forms, 296;
    social vices, 297;
    sees the weakness of Philistinism, 298;
    how justifiable, 299;
    imagination and asceticism, 300;
    intimacy with nature, 302;
    estimate of the desirable, 303;
    living illustration, 304;
    furniture, mental and material, 305;
    an English Bohemian's enjoyment, 306;
    contempt for comfort, uselessness, 307;
    self-sacrifice, 308;
    higher sort, 309;
    of Goldsmith, 309, 310;
    Corot, Wordsworth, 311;
    Palmer, 312, 313;
    part of education, 313, 314;
    a painter's, 314.
    (See _Philistinism_.)

  Bonaparte Family, criminality of, 168.
    (See _Napoleon I._)

  Books: how far an author's own, 13;
    in hospitality, 142;
    refusal to read, 195;
    indifference to, 286, 287;
    cheap and dear, 304, 305;
    Wordsworth's carelessness, 311;
    binding, 359.
    (See _Literature_, etc.)

  Bores, English dread of, 245.
    (See _Intrusion_.)

  Borrow, George, on English houses, 145.

  Botany, allusion, 166.

  Bourbon Family, criminality of, 168.

  Bourrienne, Fauvelet de, Napoleon's secretary, 367.

  Boyton, Captain, swimming-apparatus, 290.

  Boys: French, 23, 24;
    English fraternal jealousies, 66;
    education, and differences with older people, 78-98 _passim_;
    roughened by play, 100;
    friendships, 111.
    (See _Brothers_, _Fathers_, _Sons_, etc.)

  Brassey, Sir Thomas, his yacht, 138, 139.

  Brevity, in correspondence, 324-331, 361.

  Bright, John, his fraternity, 68.

  British Museum: ignorance about, 266;
    library, 287;
    confused with other buildings, 291.
    (See _London_.)

  Brontë, Charlotte, her St. John, in Jane Eyre, 196.

  Brothers: divided by incompatibility, 10;
    English divisions, 63;
    idiosyncrasy, 64;
    petty jealousy, 65, 66;
    love and hatred illustrated, 67;
    the Brights, 68;
    money affairs, 69;
    generosity and meanness, 70;
    refinement an obstacle, 71;
    lack of fraternal interest, 74;
    riches and poverty, 77.
    (See _Boys_, _Friendship_, _Sons_, etc.)

  Buffon, Georges Louis Leclerc de, his noble life, 209, 210.

  Buildings, literary illustration, vii.

  Bulgaria, lost to Turkey, 278.

  Bull-fights, women's presence, 180.
    (See _Cruelty_.)

  Bunyan, John: choice in religion, 173;
    imprisoned, 181.

  Business: affecting family ties, 64, 67;
    affecting letter-writing, 342, 343;
    Letters of (Essay XXIV.), 354-369;
    orally conducted or written, 354-357;
    stupid agents, 358, 359;
    talent for accuracy, 360;
    acknowledging orders, 361;
    apparent carelessness, one subject best, 362;
    knowledge of drawing important to explanations on paper, 363, 364;
    acquaintance with languages a help, 364;
    commercial slang, 365;
    indolence in letter-reading has disastrous results, 366-369.
    (See _Correspondence_.)

  Byron, Lord: on Friendship, 30;
    Haidée, 39;
    marriage relations, 46, 48-50, 55-57;
    as a letter-writer, 345-349;
    careless rhymes, 400.


  Calumny: caused by indistinct ideas, 292;
    in letters, 370-377.

  Cambridge University, 275, 276.

  Camden Society, publication, 318.

  Cannes, anecdote, 235.

  Cannon-balls, national intercourse, 160.
    (See _Wars_.)

  Canoe, illustration, 15.

  Card-playing: incident, 128, 129;
    French habit, 273;
    kings, 289;
    laborious, 397.

  Carelessness, causing wrong judgments, 293.

  Caste: as affecting friendship, 4;
    not the uniting force, 9;
    French rites, 16;
    English prejudice, 19;
    sins against, 22;
    among authors, 46-56;
    kinship of ideas, 67;
    ease with lower classes, 64;
    really existent, 124, 125;
    loss through poverty, 136;
    among English travellers, 240-242, 245, 246.
    (See _Classes_, _Rank_, _Titles_, etc.)

  Cat, drawing by a child, 364.

  Cathedrals: drawing a French, 23, 24;
    imposing, 189, 190, 192.

  Celibacy: Shelley's experience, 34;
    in Catholic Church, 120;
    clerical, 198-201;
    of old maids, 379-382.
    (See _Clergy_, _Priests_, _Wives_, etc.)

  Censure, dangerous in letters, 352, 353.

  Ceremony: dependent on prosperity, 125, 126;
    fondness of women for, 197, 198;
    also 187-195 _passim_.
    (See _Manners_, _Rank_, etc.)

  Chamberlain, the title, 137.

  Chambord, Count de, restoration possible, 254, 255.

  Channel, British, illustration, 14.

  Charles II., women's influence during his reign, 181.

  Charles XII., his hardiness, 308.

  Chaucer, Geoffrey, on birds, 272.

  Cheltenham, Eng., treatment of Dissenters, 19.

  Chemistry, illustration, 3.

  Cheshire, Eng., a case of generosity, 68.

  Children: recrimination with parents, 75;
    as affecting parental wealth, 119;
    social reception, 120;
    keenly alive to social distinctions, 121;
    imprudent marriages, 123;
    a poor woman's, 139;
    interruptions, 140, 141;
    ignorance of foreign language makes us seem like, 151;
    feminine care, 177;
    of clergy, 200, 201;
    cat picture, 364;
    pleasures of poor, 401.
    (See _Boys_, _Brothers_, _Marriage_, _Sons_, etc.)

  Chinese mandarins, 130.

  Chirography, in letters, 331-333.

  Christ: his divinity a past issue, 6;
    Church instituted, 178, 179;
    Dr. Macleod on, 186;
    limits of knowledge in Jesus' day, 213.
    (See _Church_, _Religion_, etc.)

  Christianity: as affecting intercourse, 5, 6;
    its early disciples, 142;
    preferment for adherence, 162, 163;
    morality a part of, 168, 169;
    state churches, 170;
    in poetry, 198;
    early ideal, 206.
    (See _Roman Catholicism_, etc.)

  Christmas: decorations, 188;
    in Tennyson, 198.
    (See _Clergy_, _Priesthood_, _Women_.)

  Church: attendance of hypocrites, 163;
    compulsory, 172;
    instituted by God in Christ, 178, 179;
    influence at all stages of life, 183-186;
    æsthetic industry, 188;
    dress, 189;
    buildings, 190;
    menaces, 193;
    partisanship, 194;
    power of custom, 198;
    authority, 203.
    (See _Religion_, _Roman Catholicism_, etc.)

  Church of England: as affecting friendship, 6;
    freedom of members in their own country, instance of Dissenting
        tyranny, 164;
    dangers of forsaking, 165;
    bondage of royalty, 166, 168;
    adherence of nobility, 169, 170, 173;
    of working-people, 170, 171;
    compulsory attendance, liberality, 172, 173;
    ribaldry sanctioned by its head, 181;
    priestly consolation, 183;
    the _legal_ church, 185;
    ritualistic art, 188-190;
    a bishop's invitation to a discussion, 192;
    story of a bishop's indolence, 366, 367;
    French ignorance of, 275.
    (See _England_, _Christ_, etc.)

  Cipher, in letters, 326.

  Civility. (See _Hospitality_.)

  Civilization: liking for, xiii;
    antagonism to nature in love-matters, 41;
    lower state, 72;
    affected by hospitality, 100;
    material adjuncts, 253;
    physical, 298;
    duty to further, 299;
    forsaken, 310.
    (See _Barbarism_, _Bohemianism_, _Philistinism_, etc.)

  Classes: Differences of Rank (Essay X.), 130-147 _passim_;
    affected by religion (Essay XII.), 161-174;
    limits, 250;
    in connection with Gentility (Essay XVIII.), 253-263 _passim_.
    (See _Caste_, _Ceremonies_, _Rank_, etc.)

  Classics, study of, in the Renaissance, 212.

  Claude, helps Turner. (See _Painters_, etc.)

  Clergy: mercenary motives, 132, 133;
    more tolerant of immorality than of heresy, 168;
    belief in natural law, 221;
    dangers of association with, 287.
    (See _Priesthood_, _Religion_, etc.)

  Clergywomen, 200, 201.

  Clerks, their knowledge an aid to national intercourse, 149, 150.
    (See _Business_, _Languages_, etc.)

  Coats-of-arms: usurped, 135;
    in letters, 326, 327.
    (See _Rank_.)

  Cockburn, Sir Alexander, knowledge of French, 151.

  Cock Robin, boat, 138.
    (See _Boating_.)

  Coffee, satire on trade, 133, 134.

  Cologne Cathedral, 190.

  Colors, in painting, 232, 233.

  Columbus, Voltaire's allusion, 274.

  Comet, in Egyptian war, 229.
    (See _Superstition_.)

  Comfort, pursuit of, 27, 298, 299.
    (See _Philistinism_.)

  Commerce, affected by language, 148-150, 159, 160.
    (See _Business_, _Languages_, etc.)

  Communism, threats, 377.

  Como, Italy, solitude, 31.

  Companionship: how decided, 4;
    affected by opinions, 5, 6;
    by tastes, 7, 8;
    in London, 20;
    with the lower classes, 21-23;
    chance, 24-26;
    intellectual exclusiveness, 27, 28;
    books, 29;
    nature, 30;
    in Marriage (Essay IV.), 44-62;
    travelling, absence, 44;
    intellectual, 45;
    instances of unlawful, 46, 47;
    failures not surprising, 48;
    of Byron, 49, 50;
    Goethe, 51, 52;
    Mill, 53, 54;
    discouraging examples, 55, 56;
    difficulties of extraordinary minds, 57;
    artificial, 58;
    hopelessness of finding ideal associations, 59;
    indications and realizations, 60;
    trust, 61, 62;
    hindered by refinement, 71, 72;
    affected by cousinship, 73;
    parents and children (Essay VI.), 78-98 _passim_;
    Death of Friendship (Essay VIII.), 110-118;
    affected by wealth and poverty (Essays IX. and X.), 119-147 _passim_;
    between Priests and Women (Essay XIII.), 175-204.
    (See _Association_, _Friendship_, etc.)

  Comradeship, difficult between parents and children, 89.
    (See _Association_, etc.)

  Concession: weakening the mind, 147;
    national, 148;
    feminine liking, 175.

  Confessional, the: influencing women, 201-203;
    a supposititious compulsion, 281.
    (See _Religion_, etc.)

  Confirmation, priestly connection with, 185.
    (See _Women_.)

  Confusion: (Essay XX.), 280-294;
    masculine and feminine, 280;
    political, 280-284;
    rebels and reformers, 280;
    private and public liberty, 281;
    Radicals, 282;
    _égalité_, 283;
    religious, 284, 285;
    Philistines and Bohemians, 285-287;
    confounding people with their associates, 287, 288;
    vocations, 288, 289;
    persons, 290;
    foreign buildings, 291;
    inducing calumny, 292;
    caused by insufficient analysis, 292, 293;
    about inventions, 293;
    result of carelessness, indolence, or senility, 293, 294.

  Consolation, of clergy, 179-183.
    (See _Religion_.)

  Construing, different from reading, 154.
    (See _Languages_.)

  Continent, the: family ties, 63;
    friendship broken by marriage, 116;
    religious liberality, 173;
    marriage, 184;
    flowers, 188, 189;
    confessional, 202, 203;
    exaggeration, 234, 235;
    table-manners of travellers, 240-252 _passim_;
    drinking-places, 262.
    (See _France_, etc.)

  Controversy, disliked, xiii.

  Conventionality: affecting personality, 15-17;
    genteel ignorance engendered by, 260-262.
    (See _Courtesy_, _Manners_, etc.)

  Conversation: chance, 26;
    compared with literature, 29;
    study of languages, 156;
    at _table d'hôte_, 239-249;
    among strangers, 247-252 _passim_;
    useless to quote, 291;
    Goldsmith's enjoyment, 309.

  Convictions, our own to be trusted, iii, iv.

  Copenhagen, battle, 327.

  Cornhill Magazine, Lever's article, 259, 260.

  Corot (Jean Baptiste Camille), his Bohemianism, 310, 311.

  Correspondence: akin to periodicals, 30;
    Belgian letters, 153;
    Courtesy of Epistolary Communication (Essay XXII.), 315-335;
    introductions and number of letters, 316;
    promptness, 317, 318;
    Plumpton Letters, 318-323;
    brevity, 324;
    telegraphy and abbreviations, 325;
    sealing, 326, 327;
    peculiar stationery, 328;
    post-cards, 329;
    _un mot à la poste_, 330;
    brevity and hurry, 331;
    handwriting, 332;
    crossed lines, ink, type-writers, 333;
    dictation, outside courtesy, 334;
    to reply or not reply? 335;
    Letters of Friendship (Essay XXIII.), 336-353;
    a supposed gain to friendship, 336;
    neglected, 337;
    impediments, 338;
    French cards, 339;
    abandonment to be regretted, 340;
    letter-writing a gift, 341;
    real self wanted in letters, 342;
    letters of business and friendship, 343;
    familiarity best, 344;
    lengthy letters, 345;
    Byron's, 346-348;
    Jacquemont's, 349;
    the Rémusat letters, 350;
    Bernardo Tasso's, Montaigne's, 350;
    perils of plain speaking, 352, 353;
    Letters of Business (Essay XXIV.), 354-369;
    differences of talent, 354;
    repeated perusals, 355;
    refuge of timidity, 356;
    letters exposed, literary faults, omissions, 357;
    directions misunderstood, 358, 359;
    acknowledging orders, 361;
    slovenly writing, one subject in each letter, 362;
    misunderstanding through ignorance, 363;
    in foreign languages, 364;
    conventional slang, 365;
    careful reading necessary, 366;
    unopened letters, 367;
    epistles half-read, 368;
    a stupid error, 369;
    Anonymous Letters (Essay XXV.), 370-382;
    common, 370;
    slanderous, 371;
    vehicle of calumny, 372;
    written to betrothed lovers, 373;
    story, 374;
    written in collaboration and with pains, 375;
    an expected grandchild, 376;
    torture and threats, 377;
    kindly and critical, 378-382.

  Corvée: allusion, 342;
    definition, 389, 390, 396, 397.
    (See _Amusements_.)

  Cottage, love in a, 35, 36.

  Court-circulars, 166, 167.

  Courtesy: its forms, 127-129;
    idioms, 157;
    in Epistolary Communication (Essay XXII.), 315-335;
    in what courtesy consists, 315;
    the act of writing, phrases, 316;
    promptitude, 317;
    instance of procrastination, 317, 318;
    illustrations, in the Plumpton Correspondence, of ancient courtesy,
        318-323, 331;
    consists in modern brevity, 324;
    foreign forms, 325;
    by telegraph, 326;
    in little things, 327;
    in stationery, 328;
    affected by postal cards, 329, 330;
    in chirography, 331, 332;
    affected by type-writers, 333;
    for show merely, 334;
    requiring answers, 335.
    (See _Manners_, _Classes_, etc.)

  Cousins: French proverb, general relationship, 72;
    lack of friendly interest, 74.
    (See _Brothers_, etc.)

  Creuzot, French foundry, 272.

  Cricket: not played in France, 272;
    author's dislike, 398.
    (See _Amusements_.)

  Crimean War, caused by ignorance, 278.
    (See _War_.)

  Criticism: intolerant of certain features in books, 89;
    in Byron's letters, 347;
    in anonymous letters, 379;
    explained by a date, 381.

  Cromwell, Oliver, contrasted with his son, 96.

  Culture and Philistinism, 285-287.

  Customs: upheld by clergy, 197, 198;
    amusements changed into, 383, 384, 389.
    (See _Ceremonies_, _Courtesy_, _Rank_, etc.)


  Daily News, London, illustration of natural law _vs._ religion, xii.

  Dancing: French quotation about, 31;
    religious aversion, 123;
    not compulsory to the poor, 388.
    (See _Amusements_, etc.)

  Dante, his subjects, 192.

  Daughters, their respectful and impertinent letters, 319-321.
    (See _Fathers_, _Sons_, _Women_, etc.)

  Death: termination of intercourse, x, xi;
    from love, 39;
    Byron's lines, 50;
    ingratitude expressed in a will, 69;
    of wife's relations, 73;
    of Friendship (Essay VIII.), 110-118;
    not personal, 110;
    of a French gentleman, 182;
    priestly connection with, 184-186, 203;
    of absent friends, 338;
    French customs, 339;
    silence, 340.
    (See _Priests_, _Religion_.)

  Debauchery, destructive of love, 34.

  Deference, why liked, 122.
    (See _Rank_, etc.)

  Deism, confounded with Atheism, 257.
    (See _God_, _Religion_, etc.)

  Delos, oracle of, 229.

  Democracies, illustration of broken friendships, 114, 115.

  Democracy: accusation of, 131;
    confounded with Dissent, 257.
    (See _Nationality_, etc.)

  Denmark, the crown-prince of, 327.

  Dependence, of one upon all, 12.

  De Saussure, Horace Benedict, his life study, 230, 231.

  Despotism, provincial and social, 17.
    (See _Tyranny_.)

  De Tocqueville, Alexis Charles Henri Clerel: allusion, 147;
    translation, 152;
    on English unsociability (Essay XVII.), 239-252 _passim_.

  Devil: priestly opposition, 195;
    belief in agency, 224;
    God's relation to, 228.
    (See _Clergy_, _Superstition_, _Religion_, etc.)

  Devonshire, Eng., its beauty, 270.

  Dickens, Charles: his middle-class portraitures, 20;
    his indebtedness to the poor, 22;
    humor, 72.

  Dictionary, references, 155.
    (See _Languages_.)

  Diderot, Denis, Goldsmith's interview, 309.

  Dignity, to be maintained in middle-life, 117.

  Diminution, habit in art and life (Essay XVI.), 232-238.
    (See _Exaggeration_.)

  Diogenes, his philosophy, 127.

  Discipline: of children, 78-98 _passim_;
    delegated, 83;
    mental, 208;
    of self, 308.

  Discord, the result of high taste, 6.

  Dishonesty, part of Bohemianism, 296.

  Disraeli, Benjamin, female estimate, 380.

  Dissenters: French estimate, 18, 19;
    English exclusion, 19, 256;
    liberty in religion, 164, 165;
    position not compulsory, 170;
    small towns, 171-173.
    (See _Church of England_, etc.)

  Dissipation: among working-men, 124;
    in France, 272, 273.
    (See _Wine_, etc.)

  Distinctions forgotten (Essay XX.), 280-294 _passim_.
    (See _Confusion_.)

  Divorce, causes of, 38.
    (See _Marriage_, _Women_, etc.)

  Dobell, Sidney, social exclusion, 19.

  Dog, rifle compared to, 392.
    (See _Amusements_.)

  Dominicans, dress, 189.
    (See _Religion_, etc.)

  Dominoes in France, 273.
    (See _Amusements_.)

  Don Quixote, illustration of paternal satire, 97.

  Doré, Gustave, his kind and long letter, 345.

  Double, Léopold, home, 142.

  Dover Straits, 337.

  Drama: power of adaptation, 72;
    amateur actors, 143.

  Drawing: a French church, 23, 24;
    aid to business letters, 363, 364.
    (See _Painters_, etc.)

  Dreams, outgrown, 60.

  Dress: connection with manners, 126, 127;
    ornaments to indicate wealth, 131;
    feminine interest, 187;
    clerical vestments, 187, 188, 198;
    sexless, 202, 203;
    of the Philistines, 297, 298;
    Bohemian, 304-307, 313, 314.
    (See _Women_.)

  Driving, sole exercise, 302.

  Drunkenness: part of Bohemianism, 296;
    in best society, 297.
    (See _Table_, _Wine_, etc.)

  Duelling, French, 273.

  Du Maurier, George, his satire on coffee-dealers, 133, 134.

  Dupont, Pierre, song about wine, 268, 269, 272.


  Ear, learning languages by, 156.
    (See _Languages_.)

  Easter: allusion, 198;
    confession, 281.

  Eccentricity: high intellect, 56;
    in an artist, 307;
    claims indulgence, 387.

  Eclipse, superstitious view, 215-217, 229.

  Economy, necessitated by marriage, 26.
    (See _Wealth_.)

  Edinburgh Review, editor, 152.

  Editor, a procrastinating correspondent, 317.

  Education: similarity, 10;
    affecting idiosyncrasy, 13;
    conventional, 15;
    effect upon humor, 20;
    literary, derived from the poor, 22;
    affected by change in filial obedience, 80-88;
    home, 81 _et seq._;
    authority of teachers, 81, 83;
    divergence of parental and filial, 84;
    special efforts, 85;
    divergent, 90-92;
    profound lack of, 91;
    never to be thrown off, 92;
    of hospitality, 99, 100;
    the effect on all religion (Essay XV.), 215-231 _passim_;
    knowledge of languages, 245;
    of Tasso family, 350, 351.
    (See _Languages_, etc.)

  Egypt: Suez Canal, xii;
    illustration of school tasks, 85;
    war of 1882, 222-224, 229.

  Eliot, George: hints from the poor, 22;
    her peculiar relation to Mr. Lewes, 45, 46, 55, 56;
    often confounded with other writers, 290.

  Elizabeth, Queen: order about the marriage of clergy, 200;
    her times, 381.
    (See _Celibacy_.)

  Emerson, Ralph Waldo: the dedication, iii, iv;
    anecdote of Napoleon, 367.

  England: newspaper reports, 41;
    a French woman's knowledge of, 107;
    respect for rank, 136;
    title-worship, 137;
    estimate of wealth, 144-146;
    slavery to houses, 145;
    French ideas slowly received, 150;
    religious freedom, 164-168, 172;
    two religions for the nobility, 169, 170, 173;
    a most relentless monarch, 180;
    women during reign of Charles II., 181;
    marriage rites, 184, 185;
    aristocracy, 246;
    A Remarkable Peculiarity (Essay XVII.), 239-252;
    meeting abroad, 239;
    reticence in each other's company, 240;
    anecdotes, 241, 242;
    dread of intrusion, 243, 244;
    freedom with foreigners and with compatriots, 245;
    not a mark of aristocracy, 246;
    fear of meddlers, 247;
    interest in rank, 248;
    reticence outgrown, 249;
    Lever's illustration, 250;
    exceptions, 251;
    Saxon and Norman influence, 251, 252;
    Dissenters ignored, 256, 257;
    general information, 263;
    French ignorance of art and literature in, 265-267, 269;
    game, 268;
    mountains, 270, 271;
    landscapes, 270;
    Church, 275;
    supposed law about attending the Mass, 281;
    homes longed for, 286;
    the architectural blunders of tourists, 291;
    Philistine lady, 304;
    painter and Philistine, 306;
    letters in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, 318-321;
    use of telegraph, 323;
    letters shortened, 325;
    letter-paper 328;
    post-cards, 329, 330;
    communication with France, 337;
    trade habits, 361, 365;
    reading of certain books not compulsory, 378;
    old maids, 381;
    winter, 399.
    (See _Church of England_, _France_, etc.)

  English Language: ignorance of, a misfortune, 149, 150;
    familiar knowledge unusual in France, 151-153;
    forms of courtesy, 157;
    conversation abroad, 240;
    _Bohemian_, 295;
    literature, 305;
    bad spelling, 360, 361;
    no synonym for _corvée_, 389;
    nautical terms, 396.
    (See _England_, etc.)

  English People: Continental repulsion, 7;
    artistic attraction, 8;
    undervaluation of chance conversations, 26;
    looseness of family ties, 63;
    ashamed of sentiment, 82;
    feeling about heredity, 93;
    one lady's empty rooms, 104;
    another's incivility, 106;
    a merchant's loss of wealth, 121, 122;
    deteriorated aristocrat, 123;
    letters by ladies, 153;
    no consoling power, 182;
    gentlewomen of former generation, 205, 206;
    where to find inspiriting models, 208;
    companions of Prince Imperial, 225;
    understatement a habit, 234-238;
    a lady's ignorant remark about servants, 258, 259;
    ignorance of French mountains, etc., 270-271;
    fuel and iron, 272;
    universities, 275, 276;
    patronage of Americans, 277;
    anonymous letter to a gentleman, 376.

  Ennui: banished by labor, 32;
    on shipboard, 396.

  Enterprise, affecting individualism, 14.

  Envy, expressed in anonymous letters, 371.

  Epiphany, annual Egyptian ceremony, xii.
    (See _Science_, _Superstition_, etc.)

  Epithets, English, 235.

  Equality: affecting intercourse, 246;
    _égalité_, 282, 283.
    (See _Rank_, _Ignorance_.)

  Equestrianism, affected by railways, 14.

  Etching, Leloir's fondness for, 401.

  Etheredge, Sir George, his ribaldry, 181.

  Eton College, allusion, 277.

  Eugénie, Empress: her influence over her husband, 176;
    his regard, 225.

  Europe: vintages, 133;
    influence of Littré, 210;
    Southern, 240;
    allusion, 254;
    Turkey nearly expelled, 278;
    latest thought, 306;
    cities, 309;
    William of Orange, on complications, 344;
    communistic disturbances, 377.
    (See _England_, _France_, etc.)

  Evangelicism, English peculiarities, 123.
    (See _Dissenters_, etc.)

  Evans, Marian. (See _George Eliot_.)

  Evolution, theory of, 176.

  Exaggeration, the habit in art and life (Essay XVI.), 232-238.
    (See _Diminution_.)

  Exercise: love of, 14;
    in the young and the old, 86, 87.
    (See _Amusements_.)

  Experience: value, 30;
    needed to avoid dangers in letter-writing, 352.

  Extravagance: part of Bohemianism, 295;
    Goldsmith's, 310.


  Family: Ties (Essay V.), 63-77;
    looseness in England, 63;
    brotherly coolness, 64;
    domestic jealousies, 65;
    laws of primogeniture, 66;
    instances of strong attachment, 67;
    illustrations of kindness, 68;
    pecuniary relations, 69;
    parsimony, 70;
    discomfort of refinement, 71;
    cousins, 72;
    wife's relations, 73;
    indifference to the achievements of kindred, 74;
    aid from relatives, domestic rudeness, 75;
    brutality, misery, 76;
    home privations, 77;
    Fathers and Sons (Essay VI.), 78-98;
    intercourse, to be distinguished from individual, 119, 120;
    rich friends, 121;
    false, 122;
    children's marriages, 123;
    old, 135, 136;
    clerical, 199, 200;
    subjects of letters, 205;
    regard of Napoleon III., 225.
    (See _Brothers_, _Sons_, etc.)

  Fashion, transient, 307.

  Fathers: separated from children by incompatibility, 10;
    by irascibility, 75;
    by brutality of tongue, 76;
    and Sons (Essay VI.), 78-98;
    unsatisfactory relation, interregnum, 78;
    old and new feelings and customs, 79;
    commanding, 80;
    exercise of authority, 81;
    Mill's experience, 82;
    abdication of authority, 83;
    personal education of sons, 84, 85;
    mistakes of middle-age, 86;
    outstripped by sons, 87;
    intimate friendship impossible, 88;
    differences of age, 89;
    divergences of education and experience, 90, 91;
    opinions not hereditary, 92, 93;
    the attempted control of marriage, 94;
    Peter the Great and Alexis, 95;
    other illustrations of discord, 96;
    satire and disregard of personality, 97;
    true foundation of paternal association, 98;
    death of a French parent, 182;
    a letter, 319-322.

  Favor, fear of loss, 147.

  Ferdinand and Isabella, religious freedom in their reign, 164.

  Fiction: love in French, 41;
    absorbing theme, 42;
    in a library, 305.

  Fletcher, Thomas, firearms made by, 391, 392.

  Florence, Italy, pestilence, 222.

  Flowers: illustration, 179;
    church use, 188;
    Flower Sunday, 189.
    (See _Women_, etc.)

  Fly, artificial, 377.

  Fog, English, 270.

  Foreigners: associations with, 7;
    view of English family life, 63;
    in travelling-conditions (Essay XVII.), 239-252 _passim_;
    association leads to misapprehension, 287;
    in England, 291.

  Fox-hunting, 180, 398, 399.
    (See _Amusements_, _Sports_, etc.)

  France: a peasant's outlook, xii;
    social despotism in small cities, 17-19;
    pleasant associations in a cathedral city, 23, 24;
    political criticism, 115;
    noisy card-players, 128, 129;
    disregard of titles, 136, 137;
    adage about riches, 145;
    English ideas slowly received, 150;
    travel in Southern, 150;
    religious freedom, 165;
    marriage, 184;
    railway accident, 218-220;
    the Imperialists, 225;
    feudal fashions, 246;
    obstinacy of the old régime, 254-256;
    mountains, 271;
    vigor of young men, 272, 273;
    universities, 275, 276;
    equality attained by Revolution, 283;
    bourgeois complaint of newspapers, 286;
    mineral oil, 288;
    confusion of tourists, 291;
    Goldsmith's travels, 309, 310;
    landscape painter, 310;
    end of Plumpton family, 323;
    use of telegraph, 323;
    letters shortened, 325;
    letter-paper, 328;
    post-cards, 330;
    chirography, 332;
    New Year's cards, 339;
    _carton non bitumé_, 358, 359;
    habits of tradesmen, 360, 361, 365;
    the _Salon_, 367;
    old maids, 381;
    a _corvée_, 389, 390;
    Leloir the painter, 401.
    (See _Continent_, etc.)

  Fraternity, _fraternité_, 282, 283.
    (See _Brothers_.)

  Freedom: national, 279;
    public and private liberty confounded, 281, 282.

  French Language: teaching, 85;
    ignorance a misfortune, 149, 150;
    rare knowledge of, by Englishmen, 151, 152;
    letters by English ladies, 153;
    forms of courtesy, 157;
    prayers, 158;
    as the universal tongue, 158, 159;
    English knowledge of, 245;
    _univers_, 273, 274.
    (See _Languages_.)

  French People: excellence in painting, and relations to Americans and
        English, 7;
    an ideal of _good form_, 15;
    old conventionality, 16-18;
    love in fiction, 41;
    family ties, 63;
    proverb about cousins, 72;
    unbelieving sons, 93;
    bourgeois table manners formerly, 101, 102;
    state apartments, 105;
    incivility towards, at an English table, 106;
    girls, 106;
    a woman's clever retort, 107;
    literature condemned by wholesale, 147;
    royal daily life, 167;
    power of consolation, 182;
    examples of virtue, 208;
    old nobility, 209;
    Buffon and Littré, 209-211;
    _hazard providentiel_, 227;
    painters, 232, 233;
    overstatement, 234, 235;
    sociability with strangers contrasted with the English want of it
        (Essay XVII.), 239-252 _passim_;
    a widow and suite, 242, 243;
    discreet social habits, 247, 248;
    a disregard of titles, 248;
    a weak question about fortune, 259;
    ignorance of English matters, 265-270;
    wine-song, 268, 269;
    fuel and iron, 271, 272;
    seeming vanity of language, 273, 274;
    conceit cured by war, 278;
    communist dreamers, 284;
    proverb, 287;
    confusion of persons, 290.

  Friendship: supposed impossible in a given case, viii, ix;
    real, x;
    how formed, 4;
    not confined to the same class, 5;
    affected by art and religion, 6;
    by taste and nationality, 7, 8;
    by likeness, 8;
    with those with whom we have not much in common, 9, 10;
    affected by incompatibility, 10;
    Byron's comparison, 30;
    affecting illicit love, 41;
    akin to marriage, 48;
    elective affinity, 75;
    Death of (Essay VIII.), 110-118;
    sad subject, no resurrection, definition, 110;
    boyish alliances, growth, 111;
    personal changes, 112;
    differences of opinion, 113;
    of prosperity, financial, professional, political, 114;
    habits, marriage, 115;
    neglect, poor and rich, 116;
    equality not essential, acceptance of kindness, new ties, 117;
    intimacy easily destroyed, 118;
    affected by wealth (Essays IX., X.), 119-147 _passim_;
    by language, 149;
    between Priests and Women (Essay XIII.), 175-204 _passim_;
    formed with strangers, 251;
    leads to misunderstood opinions, 287, 288;
    disturbed by procrastination, 317;
    Letters of, (Essay XXIII.), 336-353;
    infrequency, 336;
    obstacles, 337;
    the sea a barrier, 338;
    aid of a few words at New Year's, 339;
    death-like silence, 340;
    charm of manner not always carried into letters, 341;
    excluded by business, 342;
    cooled by reproaches, 343;
    all topics interesting to a friend, 344;
    affection overflows in long letters, 345-351;
    fault-finding dangerous, 352, 353;
    journeys saved, 360.
    (See _Association_, _Companionship_, _Family_, etc.)

  Fruit, ignorance about English, 269, 270.

  Fruition, pleasure of, 400.

  Fuel, French, 272.

  Furniture: feminine interest in, 187;
    regard and disregard (Essay XXI.), 295-314 _passim_;
    Goldsmith's extravagance, 310.
    (See _Women_.)


  Gambetta, his death, 225.

  Game: in England, 267, 268, 270;
    elephant and hippopotamus, 392.
    (See _Sports_.)

  Games, connection with amusement, 385, 397.
    (See _Cards_, etc.)

  Garden, illustration, 9.

  Gascoyne, William, letters, 318, 319.

  Generosity: affecting family ties, 69, 70;
    of a Philistine, 301.

  Geneva Lake, as seen by different eyes, 230, 231.

  Genius, enjoyment of, 303.

  Gentility: Genteel Ignorance (Essay XVIII.), 253-263;
    an ideal condition, 253;
    misfortune, 254;
    French noblesse, 255;
    ignores differing forms of religion, 256, 257;
    poverty, 258;
    inferior financial conditions, 259, 260;
    real differences, 261;
    genteel society avoided, 262;
    because stupid, 263.

  Geography: London Atlas, 274;
    work of Reclus, 291.
    (See _Ignorance_.)

  Geology, allusion, 166.
    (See _Science_.)

  George III., colonial tenure, 279.

  Germany: models of virtue, 208;
    hotel fashions, 244;
    a Bohemian and scholar, 304-306.

  German Language, English knowledge, 245.

  Gladstone, William E.: the probable effect of a French training, 17, 18;
    indebtedness to trade, 135;
    _Lord_, 137;
    foreign troubles ending in inkshed, 150;
    allusion, 241;
    use of post-cards, 335;
    female estimate, 380.

  Glasgow, steamer experience, 25.

  Gloucester, Eng., manufactory of rifles, 391, 392.

  God: of the future, 177;
    personal care, 178, 179;
    against wickedness, 180;
    Divine love, 178-181, 186, 187;
    interference with law (Essay XV.), 215-231 _passim_;
    human motives, 228.
    (See _Religion_, etc.)

  Gods: our valors the best, 177;
    siege of Syracuse, 215-217.
    (See _Superstition_.)

  Godwin, Mary, relations to Shelley, 46-48.

  Goethe: Faust's Margaret, 39;
    relation to women, 46, 50, 56, 57;
    Life, 244.

  Gold: in embroidery to indicate wealth, 131;
    color, 232, 233.

  Goldsmith, Oliver, his Bohemianism, 309, 310.

  Gormandizing, 103.
    (See _Table_.)

  Government: feminine, 176;
    scientific, 229.

  Grammar: French knowledge of, 152;
    rival of literature, 154;
    in correspondence, 356, 357.
    (See _Languages_, etc.)

  Gratitude: a sister's want of, 69;
    hospitality not reciprocated, 122.

  Greece: Byron's enthusiasm, 50, 57;
    story of Nikias, 215-217;
    advance of knowledge, 230;
    Byron's notice of a book, 348.

  Greek Church: Czar's headship, 168;
    the only true, 258.
    (See _Church of England_, etc.)

  Greek Language: teaching, 84;
    fitness as the universal language, 158, 159;
    in the Renaissance, 212;
    professorship and library, 287;
    doggerel, 400.
    (See _Languages_.)

  Groom, true happiness in a stable, 343.

  Guests: Rights of (Essay VII.), 99-109;
    respect, exclusiveness, 99;
    two views, 100;
    conformity insisted upon, 101;
    left to choose for himself, 102;
    duties towards a host, generous entertainment, 103;
    parsimonious treatment, 104;
    illustrations, ideas to be respected, 105;
    nationality also, 107;
    a host the ally of his guests, 107;
    discourtesy towards a host, 108;
    illustration, 109;
    among rich and poor, 140-144.

  Guiccioli, Countess, her relations to Byron, 49, 50.

  Guillotine, Byron's description, 347.

  Gulliver's Travels, allusion, 261.

  Gymnastics: by young Frenchmen, 272;
    aristocratic monopoly, 283.
    (See _Amusements_, etc.)


  Habits: in language, 157;
    French discretion, 247, 248.

  Hamerton, Philip Gilbert: indebtedness to Emerson, iii, iv;
    plan of the book, vii-ix;
    omissions, ix;
    the pleasures of friendship, x;
    on death, x, xi;
    a liking for civilization and all its amenities, xii;
    thoughts in French travel, 17 _et seq._;
    pleasant experience in studying French architecture, 23, 24;
    conversation in Scotland, 24, 25;
    in a steamer, 25, 26;
    acquaintance with a painter, 28;
    belief in Nature's promises, 60 _et seq._;
    what a sister said, 65;
    the love of two brothers, 67;
    delightful experience with wife's relations, 73;
    experience of hospitable tyranny, 100 _et seq._;
    Parisian dinner, 107;
    experience with friendship, 113;
    noisy French farmers, 128, 129;
    Scotch dinner, 131;
    country incident, 139, 140;
    questioning a Parisian lady, 152;
    Waterloo letters, 156;
    how Italian seems to him, 155;
    incident of Scotch travel, 173;
    visit to a bereaved French lady, 182;
    travel in France, 219;
    lesson from a painter, 232;
    snubbed at a hotel, 240-242;
    a French widow on her travels, 242, 243;
    a lady's ignorance about religious distinctions, 257;
    personal anecdotes about ignorance between the English and French,
        265-279 _passim_;
    translations into French, 267;
    Puseyite anecdote, 284, 285;
    conversations heard, 291;
    boat incident, 292, 293;
    life-portraits, 300-308;
    experience with procrastinators, 317, 318;
    residence in Lancashire, 318;
    interest in Plumpton family, 323, 324;
    telegraphing a letter, 326;
    experience with _un mot à la poste_, 330;
    his boat wrongly painted, 359;
    his Parisian correspondent, 360, 361;
    efforts to ensure accuracy, 368, 369;
    a strange lady's anxiety for his religious condition, 378;
    his Wenderholme, 378;
    anonymous letter answered, 379-382;
    dislike of cricket, 398.

  Harewood, Earl of, 323.

  Haste, connection with refinement and wealth, 125, 126.
    (See _Leisure_.)

  Hastings, Marquis of, his elopement, 321.

  Haweis, H. R., sermon on Egyptian war, 224.

  Hedges: English, 270, 271;
    sleeping under, 307.

  Hell, element in oratory, 192, 193.
    (See _Priests_.)

  Heredity, opinions not always hereditary, 92-97.

  Heresy: banishment for, 161;
    disabilities, 162 _et seq._;
    punishment by fire, 180;
    pulpit attack, 192;
    shades in, 257, 258;
    resistance to God, 284.
    (See _Roman Catholicism_, etc.)

  Highlanders, their rowing, 154.

  Hirst, Eng., letters from, 320, 321.

  History, French knowledge of, 152.

  Holland, Goldsmith's travels, 309.

  Home: Family Ties (Essay V.), 62-77;
    a hell, 76;
    crowded, 77;
    absence affecting friendship, 111;
    French, 142;
    English (Essay X.), 130-147 _passim_;
    the confessional, 202;
    nostalgia, 286.

  Homer: indebtedness to the poor, 22;
    on the appetite, 103.

  Honesty, at a discount, 162, 163, 170.

  Honor, in religious conformity, 162.

  Horace: familiarity with, 155;
    quoted, 289, 361.

  Horneck, Mrs., Goldsmith's friend, 310.

  Horseback: illustration, 168, 260;
    luxury, 298.

  Hospitality: (Essay VII.), 99-109;
    help to liberty, 99;
    an educator for right or wrong, 100;
    opposite views, 100;
    tyranny over guests, 101;
    reaction against old customs, 102;
    a host's rights, some extra effort to be expected, 103;
    disregard of a guest's comfort, 104;
    instances, opinions to be respected, 105;
    host should protect a guest's rights, 106;
    anecdote, 107;
    invasion of rights, 108;
    glaring instance, 109;
    affected by wealth, 140-144;
    excuse by a procrastinator, 318.
    (See _Guests_.)

  Hosts, rights and duties (Essay VII.), 99-109 _passim_.
    (See _Hospitality_.)

  Houghton, Lord, his knowledge of French, 151, 152.

  Housekeeping: ignorance of cost, 258, 259;
    cares, 381.

  Houses: effect of living in the same, ix;
    big, 145;
    evolution of dress, 189;
    movable, 261, 262;
    damage, 358.

  Hugo, Victor, use of a word, 273, 274.

  Humanity: obligations to, 12;
    future happiness dependent upon a knowledge of languages, 148 _et seq._

  Humor: in different classes, 20;
    lack of it, 72;
    in using a foreign language, 157, 158;
    not carried into letters and pictures, 340-342.

  Hungarians, their sociability, 249.

  Hurry, to be distinguished from brevity in letter-writing, 331.

  Husbands: narration of experience, 25, 26;
    unsuitable, 40;
    relations of noted men to wives, 44-62 _passim_;
    compulsory unions, 94-98;
    old-fashioned letter, 322;
    use of post-cards, 329, 330;
    privacy of letters, 350;
    Montaigne's letter, 351, 352.
    (See _Wives_, etc.)

  Hut: suggestions of a, 261, 262;
    for an artist, 314.

  Huxley, Thomas Henry, on natural law, 217, 219.

  Hypocrisy: to be avoided, xi-xiii;
    in religion (Essay XII.), 161-174 _passim_;
    not a Bohemian vice, 296.


  Ibraheem, lost at sea, 226.

  Ideas, their interchange dependent upon language, 148.

  Idiosyncrasy: its charm, 9;
    in art and authorship, 12, 13;
    nullified by travel, 14, 15;
    affecting marital happiness, 48-62 _passim_;
    affecting family ties, 64;
    wanted in letters, 347;
    in amusements, 389;
    congenital, 396.

  Ignorance: Genteel (Essay XVIII.), 253-263;
    among French royalists, 254, 255;
    in religion, 256, 257;
    in regard to pecuniary conditions, 258, 259;
    of likeness and unlikeness, 260, 261;
    disadvantages, 262;
    drives people from society, 263;
    Patriotic (Essay XIX.), 264-279;
    a narrow satisfaction, 264;
    French ignorance of English art, 265, 267;
    of English game, 268;
    of English fruit, 269;
    English errors as to mountains, 270, 271;
    fuel, manly vigor, 272, 273;
    word _universal_, 274;
    universities, 275, 276;
    literature, 277;
    leads to war, 277, 278;
    not the best patriotism, 279;
    unavoidable, 301;
    contented, 302;
    of gentlewomen, 381, 382.
    (See _Nationality_, etc.)

  Imagination, a luxury, 300.

  Immorality: too easily forgiven in princes, 168;
    considered essential to Bohemianism, 295.
    (See _Vice_.)

  Immortality: connection with music, 191;
    menaces and rewards, 193.
    (See _Priests_, etc.)

  Impartiality, not shown by clergy, 194.

  Impediments, to national intercourse (Essay XI.), 148-160.

  Impertinence, ease of manner mistaken for, 250.

  Incompatibility: inexplicable, 10;
    one of two great powers deciding intercourse, 11.
    (See _Friendship_, etc.)

  Independence: (Essay II.), 12-32;
    illusory and real, influence of language, 12;
    illustrations, 13;
    railway travel destructive to, 14;
    conventionality and French ideas of _good form_, 15;
    social repressions and London life, 16;
    local despotism, 17;
    the French rural aristocracy, 18;
    illustrations and social exclusion, 19;
    humor and domestic anxiety, society not essential, 20;
    palliations to solitude, outside of society, absolute solitude, 21;
    rural illustrations, 22;
    incident in a French town, 23;
    one in Scotland, 24;
    on a steamer, 25;
    English reticence, 26;
    an evil of solitude, pursuits in common, 27;
    illustration from Mill, deterioration of an artist, 28;
    patient endurance, the refreshment of books, 29;
    companionship of nature, 30;
    consolation of labor, 31;
    an objection to this relief, 32;
    a fault, 69;
    of Philistines and Bohemians (Essay XXI.), 295-314 _passim_.
    (See _Society_, etc.)

  Independents, the, in England, 170.

  India: a brother's cold farewell, 67;
    relations of England, 279.

  Indians, their Bohemian life, 298, 306.

  Individualism, affected by railways, 13-15.

  Individuality, reliance upon our own, iv.

  Indolence: destroying friendship, 116;
    stupid, 197;
    causes wrong judgment, 293;
    part of Bohemianism, 295;
    in business, 356;
    in reading letters, 366-369.

  Indulgences, affecting friendship, 115.

  Industry: to be respected, 132;
    professional work, 196;
    Buffon's and Littré's, 209, 210;
    ignorance about English, 265, 266;
    of a Philistine, 300;
    in letter-writing, 356.

  Inertia, in middle-life, 302.

  Infidelity: affecting political rights, 162, 163;
    withstood by Dissent, 257.

  Ink: dilution to save expense, 333;
    red, 369.

  Inquisition, the, in Spain, 180.

  Inspiration, in Jacquemont's letters, 348.

  Intellectuality: a restraint upon passion, 38;
    affecting family ties, 73, 74;
    its pursuits, 127;
    denied to England, 265, 266, 267;
    ambition for, 283;
    the accompaniment of wealth, 297;
    outside of, 301;
    enjoyed, 306.

  Intelligence: the supreme, 176, 177;
    connection with leisure, 197.

  Intercession, feminine fondness for, 175, 176.

  Intercourse. (This subject is so interwoven with the whole work that
        special references are impossible.)

  Interdependence, illustrated by literary work, 12.

  Interviews, compared with letters, 354-357.

  Intimacy: mysteriously hindered, 10;
    with nature, 302.

  Intolerance, of amusements, 389.

  Intrusion, dreaded by the English, 243, 247.

  Inventions, why sometimes misjudged, 292, 293.

  Irascibility, in parents, 75, 76.

  Iron, in France, 272.

  Irving, Washington, on Goldsmith, 310.

  Isolation: affecting study, 28, 29;
    alleviations, 29-31.
    (See _Independence_.)

  Italian Language: Latin naturalized, 155;
    merriment in using, 158.

  Italy: Byron's sojourn, 50;
    Goethe's, 51,
    titles and poverty, 136;
    overstatement a habit, 234;
    papal government, 255, 256;
    travelling-vans, 261,
    allusion, 271;
    why live there, 285, 286;
    tourists, 291;
    Goldsmith's travels, 309;
    forms in letter-writing, 325.


  Jacquemont, Victor, his letters, 348-350.

  James, an imaginary friend, 343, 344.

  Jardin des Plantes, Buffon's work, 209.

  Jealousy: national, 7;
    domestic, 65,
    youthful, effect of primogeniture, 66;
    between England and France, 150;
    Greece need not awaken, 159,
    excited by the confessional, 202, 203;
    in anonymous letters, 371.

  Jerusalem, the Ark lost, 229.

  Jewelry: worn by priests, 202;
    enjoyment of, 297.

  Jews: not the only subjects of useful study, 207, 208, 211;
    God of Battles, 224;
    advance of knowledge, 230.
    (See _Bible_.)

  John, an imaginary friend, 344, 345.

  Jones, an imaginary gentleman, 130.

  Justice: feminine disregard, 180;
    connection with priesthood, 194.


  Keble, John, Christian Year, 198.

  Kempis, Thomas à, his great work, 95.

  Kenilworth, anecdote, 277.

  Kindness, how to be received, 117.

  Kindred: affected by incompatibility, 10;
    Family Ties (Essay V.), 63, 77;
    given by Fate, 75.
    (See _Sons_, etc.)

  Kings: divine right, 255;
    on cards, 289;
    courtesy in correspondence, 317;
    a poetic figure, 386, 387.
    (See _Rank_, etc.)

  Knarsbrugh, Eng., 320.

  Knyghton, Henry, quotation, 251.


  Lakes, English, 270.

  Lancashire, Eng.: all residents not in cotton-trade, 288;
    residence, 318,
    drinking-habits, 378.

  Land-ownership, 131.

  Landscape: companionship, 31;
    ignorance about the English, 270.

  Languages: as affecting friendship, 7;
    similarity, 10;
    influences interdependence, 12;
    study of foreign, 29, 84, 85;
    ignorance of, an Obstacle (Essay XI.), 148-160;
    impediment to national intercourse, 148;
    mutual ignorance of the French and English, 149;
    commercial advantages, American kinship, 150;
    an imperfect knowledge induces reticence, 151;
    rarity of full knowledge, 152;
    illustrations, first stage of learning a tongue, 153;
    second, 154;
    third, fourth, 155;
    fifth, learning by ear, 156;
    absurdities, idioms, forms of politeness, 157;
    a universal speech, 158;
    Greek commended, 159;
    advantages, 160;
    one enough, 301, 305;
    acquaintance with six, 304;
    foreign letters, 364, 365.

  Latin: teaching, 84;
    construction unnatural, 155;
    in the Renaissance, 212;
    church, 258;
    proverb, 287;
    poetry, 289;
    in telegrams, 324;
    Horace, 361;
    _corrogata_, 390.

  Laws: difficult to ascertain, viii;
    human resignation to, xi;
    of Human Intercourse (Essay I.), 3-11;
    fixed knowledge difficult, 3,
    common belief, 4;
    similarity of interest, 5;
    may breed antagonism, 6;
    national prejudices, 7;
    likeness begets friendship, 8;
    idiosyncrasy and adaptability, 9;
    intimacy slow, 10;
    law of the pleasure of human intercourse still hidden, 11;
    fixed, 179;
    feminine disregard, 184;
    quiet tone, 193;
    regularity and interference (Essay XV.), 215-231 _passim_;
    legal distinctions, 280, 281.

  Laymen, contrasted with clergy, 181, 182.

  Lectures, one-sided, 29.

  Legouvé, M.: on filial relations, 78;
    religious question, 93;
    anecdote of chirography, 332.

  Leisure: its connection with refinement, 125, 126;
    varying in different professions, 196, 197.

  Leloir, Louis, fondness for etching, 401.

  Lent, allusion, 198.

  Letters. (See _Correspondence_.)

  Lever, Charles: quotation from That Boy of Norcott's, 249, 250;
    finances misunderstood, 259, 260;
    boating, 259, 394.

  Lewes, George Henry: relation to Marian Evans, 45;
    quotation from Life of Goethe, 244.

  Lewis, Sir George Cornewall, immortal saying, 385.

  L'Honneur et l'Argent, quotation, 304, 335.

  Liberality: French lack of, 18, 19;
    induced by hospitality, 99, 100;
    apparent, 173.

  Liberty: in religion (Essay XII.), 161-174;
    private and public, 281, 282;
    _liberté_, 282, 283;
    with friends in letters, 353.

  Libraries: value, 286, 287;
    narrow specimens, 302.

  Lies, at a premium, 162, 163.

  Life: companionship for, 44-62;
    enjoyed in different ways, 306.

  Likeness, the secret of companionship, 8.

  Limpet, an illustration of incivility, 108.

  Literature: conventional, 15;
    influence of the humbler classes, 22, 23;
    softens isolation, 29, 31;
    deaths from love, 39;
    affecting fraternity, 64;
    youthful nonsense not tolerated in books, 89;
    superiority to mercenary motives, 132;
    advantages of mutual national knowledge, 149-153;
    rivals in its own domain, 154;
    not necessarily religious, 198;
    English periodical, 237;
    ignorance about English, 267;
    and Philistinism, 286, 287;
    singleness of aim, 289;
    English, 305;
    not an amusement, 400.

  Littré, Maximilien Paul Émile, his noble life, 209-211.

  Livelihood, anxiety about, 20.

  London: mental independence, 16-18;
    solitude needless, 20;
    Mill's rank, 56;
    old but new, 136;
    Flower Sunday, 189;
    pestilence improbable, 222;
    The Times, 244;
    centre of English literature, 267;
    business time contrasted with that of Paris, 273;
    buildings, 291;
    Palmer leaving, 310;
    cabman, 335;
    a famous Londoner, 399.

  Lottery, illustrative of kinship, 75.

  Louis II., amusements, 386-388.

  Louis XVIII., impiety, 167.

  Louvre: English art excluded, 267;
    confounded with other buildings, 291.

  Love: of nature, 30;
    Passionate (Essay III.), 33-43;
    nature, blindness, 33;
    not the monopoly of youth, debauchery, 34;
    permanence not assured, 35;
    "in a cottage," perilous to happiness, socially limited, 36;
    restraints, higher and lower, 37;
    varieties, selfishness, in intellectual people, 38;
    poetic subject, dying for, 39;
    old maids, unlawful in married people, 40;
    French fiction, early marriage repressed by civilization, 41;
    passion out of place, the endless song, 42;
    natural correspondences and Shelley, 43;
    in marriage, 44-62;
    some family illustrations, 63-77;
    wife's relations, 73;
    paternal and filial (Essay VI.), 78-98 _passim_;
    between friends (Essay VIII.), 110-118;
    divine, 178, 179;
    family, 205.
    (See _Brothers_, _Family_, etc.)

  Lowell, James Russell, serious humor, 20.

  Lower Classes, the: English rural, 22;
    rudeness, 75;
    religious privileges, 170, 171.

  Luxury, material, 298.
    (See _Philistinism_.)

  Lyons, France, the Academy, 275.


  Macaulay, T. B., quotations, 181, 200, 224, 344, 345.

  Macleod, Dr. Norman, his sympathy, 186, 187.

  Magistracy, French, 283.

  Mahometanism, as affecting intercourse, 5.

  Malice: harmless, 269;
    in letters, 371-377.

  Manchester, Eng., life there, 31.

  Manners: affected by wealth, 125-129;
    by leisure, 197;
    by aristocracy, 246.
    (See _Courtesy_, etc.)

  Manufactures: under fixed law, 228;
    ignorance about English, 265, 266, 268.

  Marriage: responsibility increased, 25, 26;
    or celibacy? 34;
    Shelley's, does not assure love, 35;
    following love, 36;
    irregular, 37;
    restraints of superior intellects, 38;
    love outside of, 40;
    early marriage restrained by civilization, 41;
    philosophy of this, 42;
    Companionship in (Essay IV.), 44-62;
    life-journey, 44;
    alienations for the sake of intellectual companionship, 45;
    illustrations, 46, 47;
    mistakes not surprising, 48;
    Byron, 49, 50;
    Goethe, 51, 52;
    Mill, 53, 54;
    difficulty in finding true mates, 55;
    exceptional cases not discouraging, 56;
    easier for ordinary people, 57;
    inequality, 58;
    hopeless tranquillity, 59;
    youthful dreams dispelled, 60;
    Nature's promises, how fulfilled, 61;
    "I thee worship," 62;
    wife's relations, 73;
    filial obedience, 94-97;
    destroying friendship, 115;
    affecting personal wealth, 119;
    social treatment, 120;
    of children, 123;
    effect of royal religion, 166;
    and of lower-class, 171;
    civil and religious, 184, 185;
    clerical, 196, 198-201;
    of absent friends, 338;
    French customs, 339;
    Montaigne's sentiments, 351, 352;
    slanderous attempts to prevent, 371-375;
    household cares, 381;
    breakfasts, 385, 386.
    (See _Women_, etc.)

  Mask, a simile, 370.

  Mediocrity, dead level of, 236.

  Mediterranean Sea, allusion, 399.

  Meissonier, Jean Ernest Louis, his talent, 284.

  Melbourne, Bishop of, 221.

  Men, choose for themselves, 197.
    (See _Marriage_, _Sons_, _Women_, etc.)

  Mephistopheles, allusion, 235.

  Merchants, connection with national peace, 149, 150.

  Mérimée, Prosper, Correspondence, 321.

  Metallurgy, under fixed law, 228.

  Methodists, the: in England, 170;
    hymns, 257.

  Michelet, Jules: on the Church, 189, 190;
    on the confessional, 202, 203.

  Middle Classes: Dickens's descriptions, 20;
    rank of some authors, 56;
    domestic rudeness, 75;
    table customs, 103;
    religious freedom, 170;
    clerical inferences, 183.
    (See _Classes_, _Lower Class_, etc.)

  Mignet, François Auguste Marie: friendship with Thiers, 120;
    condition, 121.

  Military Life: illustration, 21;
    filial obedience, 80;
    religion, 123;
    religious conformity, 169;
    antagonistic to toleration, 173, 174;
    French, 272;
    allusion, 300, 307.

  Mill, John Stuart: social affinities, 20;
    aversion to unintellectual society, 27, 28;
    relations to women, 53-55;
    social rank, 56;
    education by his father, 81-84;
    on friendship, 112, 113;
    on sneering depreciation, 237;
    on English conduct towards strangers, 245;
    on social stupidity, 263.

  Milnes, Richard Monckton. (See _Lord Houghton_.)

  Milton, John, Palmer's constant interest, 313.

  Mind, weakened by concession, 147.

  Misanthropy, appearance of, 27.

  Montaigne, Michel: marriage, 59;
    letter to wife, 351, 352.

  Montesquieu, Baron, allusion, 147.

  Months, trade terms for, 365.

  Morris, Lewis, A Cynic's Day-dream, 393.

  Mothers, "loud-tongued," 75.
    (See _Children_, _Women_, etc.)

  Mountains: climbing affected by railways, 14;
    quotation from Byron, 30;
    in pictures, 43;
    glory in England and France, 270, 271;
    Mont Blanc, where situated, 271.

  Mozart, Johann Chrysostom Wolfgang Amadeus, allusion, 289.

  Muloch, Dinah Maria, confounded with George Eliot, 290.

  Music: detached from religion, xii, xiii;
    voice of love, 42;
    affecting fraternity, 64;
    connection with religion, 191;
    illustration of harmony, 389.


  Nagging, by parents, 76.

  Napoleon I.: and the Universe, 273, 274;
    privations, 308;
    _mot_ of the Pope, 341;
    Rémusat letters, 350.

  Napoleon III.: death, son, 225;
    ignorance of German power, 278;
    losing Sedan, 308.

  Nationality: prejudices, 7;
    to be respected at table, 106, 107;
    different languages an obstacle to intercourse (Essay XI.), 148-160;
    mutual ignorance (Essay XIX.), 264-279 _passim_.

  National Gallery, London, 291.

  Nature: compensations, iv;
    causes, xii;
    laws not deducible from single cases, 4;
    inestimable gifts, 26;
    beauty an alleviation of solitude, loyalty, 30, 31;
    opposed to civilization in love-matters, 41;
    universality of love, 42, 43;
    promises fulfilled, 60-62;
    revival of study, 212;
    laws fixed (Essay XV.), 215-231 _passim_;
    De Saussure's study, 230, 231;
    expressed in painting, 232, 233;
    nearness, 303-314 _passim_;
    her destroyers, 393.

  Navarre, King Henry of, 224.

  Navy, a young officer's acquaintance, 25, 26.

  Neglect, destroys friendship, 116.

  Nelson, Lord: the navy in his time, 279;
    letter in battle, 327, 328.

  Nerves, affected by rudeness, 128, 129.

  New England, a blond native, 240.

  Newspapers: on nature and the supernatural, xii;
    adultery reports in English, 41;
    personal interest, 124;
    regard for titles, 137;
    quarrels between English and American, 150;
    reading, 156;
    on royalty, 166, 167;
    deaths in, 225;
    English and French subservience to rank, 248;
    a bourgeois complaint, 286;
    crossing the seas, 337, 338.

  New Year's, French customs, 339.

  Niagara Rapids, 290.

  Night, Palmer's watches, 312.

  Nikias, a military leader, his superstition, 215-217, 229.

  Nineteenth Century, earlier half, 205, 206.

  Nobility: the English have two churches to choose from, 169-171, 173;
    opposition to Dissent, 256, 257.

  Nonconformity, English, 256, 257.
    (See _Dissent_, etc.)

  Normans, influence of the Conquest, 251, 252.


  Oaths, no obstacle to hypocrisy, 162.

  Obedience, filial (Essay VI.), 78-98.

  Observation, cultivated, 290, 291.

  Obstacles: of Language, between nations (Essay XI.), 148-160;
    of Religion (Essay XII.), 161-174.

  Occupations, easily confused, 288, 289.

  Oil, mineral, 288.

  Old Maids, defence, 379-382.

  Olympus, unbelief in its gods, 162.

  Oman, sea of, 226.

  Opinions: not the result of volition, xiii;
    of guests to be respected, 105, 106;
    changes affecting friendship, 112, 113.

  Orange, William of, correspondence, 344, 345.

  Oratory, connection with religion, xii, 191-195.

  Order of the Universe, to be trusted, iii.

  Originality: seen in authorship, 12;
    how hindered and helped, 13, 14;
    French estimate, 15.

  Orthodoxy, placed on a level with hypocrisy, 162, 163.

  Ostentation, to be shunned in amusements, 401.

  Oxford: opinion of a learned doctor about Christ's divinity, 6;
    Shelley's expulsion, 96;
    its antiquity, 275, 276.


  Paganism: hypocrisy, and preferment, 162;
    gods and wars, 224.

  Paget, Lady Florence, curt letter, 321.

  Pain, feminine indifference to, 180.

  Painters: taste in travel, 14;
    deterioration of a, 28;
    discovering new beauties, 60;
    Corot, 310, 311;
    Palmer, 312;
    one in adversity, 314;
    gayety not in pictures, 341;
    sketches in letters, 345;
    of boats, 359;
    lack of business in French painter, 367, 368;
    idle sketches, 400;
    Leloir, 401.

  Painter's Camp in the Highlands, 379.

  Painting: fondness for it a cause of discord, 6;
    French excellence, 8;
    interdependence, 13;
    high aims, 28;
    palpitating with love, 43;
    affecting fraternity, 64;
    none in heaven, 191;
    not necessarily religious, 198;
    copies, 203;
    two methods, 232, 233;
    convenient building, 261;
    ignorance about English, 265-267;
    not merely an amusement, 400.
    (See _Art_, etc.)

  Paleontology, allusion, 206.

  Palgrave, Gifford, saved from shipwreck, 226-228.

  Palmer, George, a speech, 223.

  Palmer, Samuel, his Bohemianism, 312, 313.

  Palmer, William, in Russia, 257, 258.

  Paper, used in correspondence, 328.

  Paradise: the arts in, 191;
    affecting pulpit oratory, 193.
    (See _Priests_.)

  Paris: an artistic centre, 8;
    incivility at a dinner, 107;
    effect of wealth, 121;
    elegant house, 142;
    English residents, 150;
    a lady's reply about English knowledge of French language, 152;
    Notre Dame, 190;
    Jardin des Plantes, 209;
    hotel incident, 240-242;
    not a desert, 242;
    light of the world, 266, 267, 274;
    resting after _déjeûner_, 273;
    confusion about buildings, 291;
    an illiterate tradesman, 360, 361;
    the _Salon_, 367.

  Parliament: illustration of heredity, 93;
    indebtedness of members to trade, 135;
    infidelity in, 162;
    superiority of pulpit, 191;
    George Palmer, 223;
    questions in, 241;
    Houses, 291.

  Parsimony: affecting family ties, 70;
    in hospitality, 104, 105.

  Patriotism: obligations, 12;
    Littré's, 210;
    Patriotic Ignorance (Essay XIX.), 264-279;
    places people in a dilemma, 264;
    anecdotes of French and English errors, about art, literature,
        mountains, landscapes, fuel, ore, schools, language, 265-277;
    ignorance leading to war, 277-279;
    suspected of lacking, 287-288.

  Peace, affected by knowledge of, languages, 148-150, 160.

  Peculiarity, of English people towards each other (Essay XVII.), 239-252.

  Pedagogues, their narrowness, 154.

  Pedestrianism: as affected by railways, 14;
    in France, 272, 273;
    not enjoyed, 302.

  Peel, Arthur, his indebtedness to trade, 135.

  Pencil, use, when permissible, 333.

  Periodicals, akin to correspondence, 30.

  Persecution, feminine sympathy with, 80, 181.

  Perseverance, Buffon's and Littré's, 209, 210.

  Personality: its "abysmal deeps," 11;
    repressed by conventionality, 15;
    accompanies independence, 17;
    affecting family ties, 63-77 _passim_;
    paternal and filial differences, 78-98 _passim_;
    its frank recognition, 98;
    confused, anecdotes, 289, 290.

  Persuasion, feminine trust in, 175.

  Pestilence, God's anger in, 222.

  Peter the Great, sad relations to his son, 95, 96.

  Philistinism: illustrative stories, 285, 286;
    defined, 297;
    passion for comfort, 298;
    asceticism and indulgence, 299, 300;
    a life-portrait, 300-303;
    estimate of life, 303;
    an English lady's parlor, 304, 305;
    contrast, 306;
    avoidance of needless exposure, 313.

  Philology: a rival of literature, 154;
    favorable to progress in language, 155.

  Philosophy: detached from religion, xii;
    rational tone, 193.

  Photography: a French experience, 24;
    under fixed law, 228.

  Physicians: compared with priests, 186;
    rational, 193;
    Littré's service, 210.

  Picturesque, regard for the, 7.

  Piety: and law (Essay XV.), 215-231 _passim_;
    shipwreck, 226, 227.

  Pitt, William, foreign disturbances in his day, 150.

  Pius VII., on Napoleon, 341.

  Play, boyish friendship in, 111.

  Pleasures, three in amusements, 399, 400.

  Plebeians, in England, 251, 252.

  Plumpton Correspondence, 318-323, 331.

  Poetry: detached from religion, xii;
    of love, 42;
    dulness to, 47;
    Shelley's, 47;
    Byron's, 50, 345-349;
    Goethe's, 51;
    and science, 57;
    Tennyson on Brotherhood, 67;
    lament, 73;
    art, 154;
    music in heaven, 191;
    Keble, 198;
    Battle of Ivry, 224;
    French, 268, 269;
    Latin, loyalty of Tennyson, 289;
    French couplet, 304;
    in a library, 305;
    "If I be dear," 325;
    Horace, 361;
    Palace of Art, 386;
    quotation from Morris, 393;
    line about anticipation, 399.

  Poets: ideas about the harmlessness of love, 36;
    avoidance of practical difficulties, 39;
    love in natural scenery, 43.

  Politics: conventional, 15;
    French narrowness, 18, 19;
    coffee-house, 28;
    inherited opinions, 93;
    opinions of guests to be respected, 105, 106;
    affecting friendship, 113-115;
    affected by ignorance of language, 148, 150, 160;
    adaptation of Greek language, 158;
    disabilities arising from religion, 161-174;
    divine government, 229;
    genteel ignorance, 254-256;
    votes sought, 257;
    affected by national ignorance, 277-279;
    distinctions confounded, 280-284;
    verses on letter-writing, 335.

  Ponsard, François, quotations, 304, 335.

  Popes: their infidelity, 162;
    temporal power, 255, 256.
    (See _Roman Catholicism_, etc.)

  Popular Notions, often wrong, 292.

  Postage, cheap, 336.

  Postal Union, a forerunner, 159.

  Post-cards, affecting correspondence, 329, 330, 335.

  Poverty: allied with shrewdness, 22;
    affecting friendship (Essay IX.), 116, 119-129;
    priestly visits, 183;
    Littré's service, 210;
    ignorance about, 258-260;
    French rhyme, 304;
    not always the concomitant of Bohemianism, 309;
    not despised, 314;
    in epistolary forms, 317.

  Prayers: reading in French, 158;
    averting calamities, 220-231 _passim_.

  Prejudices: about great men, 4;
    national, 7;
    of English gentlewomen, 382.

  Pride: of a wife, 59;
    in family wealth, 66;
    refusal of gifts, 68;
    in shooting, 390.

  Priesthood: Priests and Women (Essay XIII.), 175-204;
    meeting feminine dependence, 178;
    affectionate interest, 179;
    representing God, 182;
    sympathy, 183;
    marriages and burials, 184;
    baptism and confirmation, 185;
    death, 186;
    Queen Victoria's reflections, 186, 187;
    æsthetic interest, 188;
    vestments, 189;
    architecture, 190;
    music, 191;
    oratory and dignity, 192;
    heaven and hell, 193;
    partisanship, 194;
    association in benevolence, 195;
    influence of leisure, 196;
    custom and ceremony, 197;
    holy seasons, 198;
    celibacy, 199;
    marriage in former times, 200;
    sceptical sons, 201;
    confessional, 202;
    assumption of superiority, 203;
    perfunctory goodness, 204.

  Primogeniture, affecting family ties, 66.

  Privacy: of a host, to be respected, 109;
    in letters, 350, 357.

  Procrastination: in correspondence, 318, 319, 356;
    anecdotes, 366-369.

  Profanity, definition, 208.

  Professions, contrasted with trades, 132, 133.

  Progress, five stages in the study of language, 153-157.

  Promptness: in correspondence, 316, 317, 329;
    in business, 368.

  Propriety, cloak for vice, 297.

  Prose: an art, 154;
    eschewed by Tennyson, 289.

  Prosody, rival of literature, 154.

  Protestantism: in France, 19, 165, 256;
    Prussian tyranny, 173;
    exclusion of music, 191;
    clerical marriages, 200, 201;
    auricular confession, 201-203;
    liberty infringed, 281.

  Providence and Law (Essay XV.), 215-231 _passim_.

  Prussia: Protestant tyranny, 173;
    a soldier's cloak, 189;
    military strength, 278.

  Public Men, wrong judgment about, 4.

  Punch's Almanack, quoted, 133.

  Pursuits, similarity in, 10.

  Puseyism, despised, 284, 285.

  Puzzle, language regarded as a, 153, 154.


  Rabelais, quotation, 165.

  Racehorses, illustration, 65.

  Radicalism, definition, 282, 283.

  Railways: affecting independence, 13-15;
    meditations in a French, 17;
    story in illustration of rudeness, 108, 109;
    distance from, 116;
    French accident, 218-220;
    moving huts, 261, 262;
    Stephenson's locomotive, 293;
    allusion, 309;
    journeys saved, 360;
    compared to sailing, 395.

  Rain: cause of accident, 219;
    prayers for, 221.

  Rank: a power for good, 5;
    conversation of French people of, 16;
    pursuit of, 27;
    discrimination in hospitality, 104;
    affecting friendship, 116;
    Differences (Essay X.), 130-147;
    social precedence, 130;
    land and money, 131;
    trades and professions, 132-135;
    unreal distinctions, 135;
    to be ignored, 136;
    English and Continental views, 136, 137;
    family without title, 138;
    affecting hospitality, 139-145;
    price, deference, 145-147;
    English admiration, 241, 242, 248, 249-252;
    connection with amusement, 383-401 _passim_.

  Rapidity, in letter-writing, 324, 325.

  Reading, in a foreign language, 154-158.

  Reading, Eng., speech, 223, 224.

  Reasoning, in letters, 384, 385.

  Rebels, contrasted with reformers, 280.

  Recreation, the purpose of amusement, 389.

  Reeve, Henry, knowledge of French, 152.

  Reformers, and rebels, 280, 281.

  Refinement: affecting family harmony, 64;
    companionship, 71;
    enhanced by wealth, 125, 126.

  Religion: affecting human intercourse, xi-xiii;
    detached from the arts, xii;
    affecting friendship, 5, 6;
    conventional, 15;
    Cheltenham prejudice, 19;
    formal in England, 63;
    affecting fraternity, 64;
    affecting family regard, 74;
    clergyman's son, 90, 91;
    family differences, 93, 94;
    to be respected in guests, 105, 106;
    destroying friendship, 113;
    Evangelical, 123;
    personal deterioration, 124;
    mercenary motives, 132, 133;
    title-worship, 137;
    an Obstacle (Essay XII.), 161-174;
    the dominant, 161;
    a hindrance to honest people, 162;
    dissimulation, 163;
    apparent liberty, 164;
    social penalties, 165;
    no liberty for princes, 166;
    French illustration, 167;
    royal liberty in morals, 168;
    official conformity, 169;
    greater freedom in the lower ranks, 170;
    less in small communities, 171;
    liberty of rejection and dissent, 172;
    false position, 173;
    enforced conformity, 174;
    Priests and Women (Essay XIII.), 175-204;
    of love, 178, 179;
    Why we are Apparently becoming Less Religious (Essay XIV.), 205-214;
    meditations of ladies of former generation, 205;
    trust in Bible, 206;
    idealization, 207;
    Nineteenth Century inquiries, 208;
    Buffon as an illustration, 209;
    Littré, 210;
    compared with Bible characters, 211;
    the Renaissance, 212;
    boundaries outgrown, 213;
    less theology, 214;
    How we are Really becoming Less Religious (Essay XV.), 215-231;
    superstition, 215;
    supernatural interference, 216, 217;
    idea of law diminishes emotion, 218;
    railway accident, 219;
    prayers and accidents, 220;
    future definition, 221;
    penitence and punishment, 222;
    war and God, 223;
    natural order, 224;
    Providence, 225;
    salvation from shipwreck, 226;
    _un hazard providentiel_, 227;
    _irreligion_, 228;
    less piety, 229;
    devotion and science, 230;
    wise expenditure of time, 231;
    feuds, 240;
    genteel ignorance of established churches, 255-258;
    French ignorance of English Church, 275;
    distinctions confounded, 281, 282;
    intolerance mixed with social contempt, 284, 285;
    activity limited to religion and riches, 301;
    in old letters, 320, 321, 323;
    female interest in the author's welfare, 377, 378;
    in theology, 379, 380.
    (See _Church of England_, _Methodism_, _Protestantism_, etc.)

  Rémusat, Mme. de, letters, 350.

  Renaissance, expansion of study in the, 212.

  Renan, Ernest, one objection to trade, 132.

  Republic, French, 254, 283, 284.

  Residence, affecting friendship, 116.

  Respect: the road to filial love, 98;
    why liked, 122;
    in correspondence, 316.

  Restraints, of marriage and love, 36, 37.

  Retrospection, pleasures of, 400.

  Revolution, French, 209, 246, 283.
    (See _France_.)

  Riding, Lever's difficulties, 260.

  Rifles: in hunting, 391-393;
    names, 392.

  Rights. (See different heads, such as _Hospitality_, _Sons_, etc.)

  Robinson Crusoe, illustration, 21.

  Rock, simile, 251.

  Roland, his sword Durindal, 391.

  Roman Camp, site, 14.

  Roman Catholicism: its effect on companionship, 6;
    seen in rural France, 19;
    illustration of the Pope, 87;
    infidel sons, 93;
    wisdom of celibacy, 120;
    infidel dignitaries, 162;
    liberty in Spain, 164;
    royalty hearing Mass, 167;
    military salute to the Host, 169;
    recognition in England, 169, 170, 173;
    Continental intolerance, 172, 173;
    a conscientious traveller, 173;
    oppression in Prussia, 173;
    tradesmen compelled to hear Mass, 174;
    Madonna's influence, 176;
    priestly consolation, 183;
    use of art, 188-190;
    Dominican dress, 189;
    cathedrals, the Host, 190;
    astuteness, celibacy, 199;
    female allies, 200;
    confessional, 201, 202;
    feudal tenacity, 255;
    Protestantism ignored, 256;
    Romanism ignored by the Greek Church, 258;
    compulsory attendance, 282.
    (See _Priesthood_, _Religion_, etc.)

  Romance: like or dislike for, 7;
    glamour of love, 42.

  Rome: people not subjected to the papacy, 255, 256;
    Byron's letter, 347.

  Rossetti, on Mrs. Harriett Shelley, 46.

  Rouen Cathedral, 190.

  Royal Academy, London, 266, 276.

  Royal Society, London, 274.

  Royalty, its religious bondage, 166-169, 171.

  Rugby, residence of a father, 84.

  Ruolz, the inventor, his bituminous paper, 358, 359.

  Russell, Lord Arthur, his knowledge of French, 152.

  Russia: religious position of the Czar, 168;
    orthodoxy, 257, 258;
    war with Turkey, 278.
    (See _Greek Church_.)


  Sabbath, its observance, 123.

  Sacredness, definition of, 208.

  Sacrifices: demanded by courtesy, 315, 316;
    in letter-writing, 329-331;
    to indolence, 368.

  Sahara, love-simile, 60.

  Saint Bernard, qualities, 230, 231.

  Saint Hubert's Day, carousal, 345.

  Saints, in every occupation, 209.

  Salon, French, 266, 276, 367.

  Sarcasm: lasting effects, 66;
    brutal and paternal, 97.

  Satire. (See _Sarcasm_.)

  Savagery, return to, 298.
    (See _Barbarism_, _Civilization_.)

  Saxons, influence in England, 251, 252.

  Scepticism: and religious rites, 184, 185;
    in clergymen's sons, 201.
    (See _Heresy_.)

  Schools, prejudice against French, 106.

  Schuyler's Life of Peter the Great, 96.

  Science: study affected by isolation, 29;
    and poetry, 57;
    superiority to mercenary motives, 132;
    in language, 154;
    adaptation of Greek language to, 158;
    illustration, 166;
    cold, 176, 178, 190;
    disconnected with religion, 198;
    affecting Bible study, 206;
    connection with religion (Essay XV.), 215-231 _passim_.

  Scolding, 75, 76.

  Scotland: a chance acquaintance, 25, 26;
    gentleman's sacrifice for his son, 84;
    incident in a country-house, 131;
    religious incident in travel, 173;
    a painter's hint, 232;
    the Highlands, 271;
    scenery, 379;
    cricket impossible, 398.

  Scott, Sir Walter: indebtedness to the poor, 22;
    Lucy of Lammermoor, 39, 143, 144;
    Jeanie Deans, 175;
    supposed American ignorance of, 277;
    quotation from Waverley, 327;
    Provost's letter, 365.

  Sculpture: warmed by love, 42, 43;
    none in heaven, 191;
    ignorance about English, 265.
    (See _Art_, etc.)

  Seals on letters, 326-328.

  Secularists: in England, 171;
    tame oratory, 193.

  Sedan, cause of lost battle, 308.

  Seduction, how restrained, 38.

  Self-control, grim, 397.

  Self-esteem, effect of benevolence in developing, 196.

  Self-examination, induced by letters, 380.

  Self-indulgence, of opposite kinds, 299, 300.

  Self-interest: affecting friendship, 116;
    at the confessional, 202.

  Selfishness: affected by marriage, 26;
    desire for comfort, 27;
    affecting passion, 38;
    in hosts, 101, 102;
    in a letter, 334;
    in amusements, 397.

  Sensuality, connection with Bohemianism, 296.

  Sentences, reading, 156.

  Sentiment, none in business, 353, 364.

  Separations: between friends, 111-118;
    letter-writing during, 338;
    Tasso family, 350, 351.

  Sepulchre, whited, 297.

  Sermons: one-sided, 29;
    in library, 302.

  Servants: marriage to priests, 200;
    often needful, 259;
    concomitants of wealth, 297, 298;
    none, 307;
    in letters, 324;
    anonymous letter, 376;
    hired to wait, 397.

  Severn River, 270.

  Sexes: pleasure in association, 3;
    passionate love, 34;
    relations socially limited, 36, 37;
    antagonism of nature and civilization, 41;
    in natural scenery, 43;
    inharmony in marriages, 44-62 _passim_;
    sisters and brothers, 65;
    connection with confession, 201-204;
    lack of analysis, 280;
    Bohemian relations, 296, 297.

  Shakspeare: indebtedness to the poor, 22;
    Juliet, 39;
    portraiture of youthful nonsense, 88;
    allusion by Grant White, 277;
    Macbeth and Hamlet confused, 290;
    Polonius's advice applied to Goldsmith, 310.

  Shelley, Percy Bysshe: his study of past literature, 13;
    passionate love, 34;
    marriages, 35, 46-48, 55, 56;
    quotation, 43;
    disagreement with his father, 96, 97.

  Ships: passing the Suez canal, xii;
    interest of Peter the Great, and dislike of his son, 85;
    at siege of Syracuse, 215;
    of war, 277, 278;
    as affecting correspondence, 337;
    drifting, 378;
    fondness for details, 394.

  Shoeblack, illustration, 335.

  Shyness, English, 245.

  Siamese Twins, allusion, 290.

  Silence, golden, 85.

  Sin, affecting pulpit oratory, 193.

  Sir, the title, 137.

  Sisters: affection, 63-77 _passim_;
    jealousy of admiration, 65;
    pecuniary obligations, how regarded, 69.

  Slander: by rich people, 146, 147;
    in anonymous letters, 370-377.

  Slang, commercial, 365.

  Slovenliness, part of Bohemianism, 296.

  Smith, an imaginary gentleman, 130.

  Smith, Jane, an imaginary character, 178.

  Smoking: affecting friendship, 115;
    Bohemian practice, 305.

  Snobbery, among English travellers, 240-242.

  Sociability: affecting the appetite, 102;
    English want of (Essay XVII.), 239-252;
    in amusements, 383, 384.

  Society: good, in France, 15, 16;
    eccentricity no barrier in London, 16-18;
    exclusion, 21, 22;
    unexpectedly found, 23-26;
    alienation from common pursuits, 27, 28;
    aid to study, 29-31;
    restraints upon love, 36, 37;
    laws set aside by George Eliot, 45, 46, 55;
    Goethe's defiance, 52, 56, 57;
    rights of hospitality, illustrated (Essay VII.), 99-109;
    aristocratic, 124;
    affected by rank and wealth (Essay X.), 130-147 _passim_;
    and by religion (Essay XII.), 161-174 _passim_;
    ruled by women, 176;
    tyranny, 181;
    clerical leisure, 196, 197;
    inimical to Littré, 210;
    absent air in, 237;
    affected by Gentility (Essay XVIII.), 253-263;
    secession of thinkers, 262, 263;
    intellectual, 303;
    usages, 304;
    outside of, 307.

  Socrates, allusion, 204.

  Solicitors, their industry, 196.

  Solitude: social, 19;
    dread, 21;
    pleasant reliefs, 22-26;
    serious evil, 27;
    sometimes demoralizing, 28;
    affecting study, 29;
    mitigations, 29-31;
    preferred, 31;
    forgotten in labor, 31, 32;
    picture of, 43;
    Shelley's fondness, 47;
    free space necessary, 77;
    dislike prompting to hospitality (_q. v._), 143.

  Sons: separated from fathers by incompatibility, 10;
    escape from paternal brutality, 76;
    Fathers and (Essay VI.), 78-98;
    change of circumstances, 78;
    former obedience, 79;
    orders out of fashion, 80;
    outside education, 81;
    education by the father, 82-85;
    rapidity of youth, 86, 87;
    lack of paternal resemblance, 88;
    differing tastes, 89;
    fathers outgrown, 90;
    changes in culture, 91;
    reservations, 92;
    differing opinions, 93;
    oldtime divisions, 94;
    an imperial son, 95;
    other painful instances, 96;
    wounded by satire, 97;
    right basis of sonship, 98.
    (See _Family_, _Fathers_, etc.)

  Sorbonne, the, professorship of English, 152.

  Southey, Robert, Life of Nelson, 327.

  Spain: religious freedom, 164;
    heretics burned, 180.

  Speculation, compared with experience, 30.

  Speech, silvern, 85.

  Spelling, inaccurate, 360.
    (See _Languages_, etc.)

  Spencer, Herbert: made the cover for an assault upon a guest's opinions,
        106;
    on display of wealth, 145;
    confidence in nature's laws, 227.

  Spenser, Edmund, his poetic stanza, 384.

  Sports: often comparatively unrestrained, 36;
    affecting fraternity, 64;
    youth fitted for, 86;
    roughening influence, 100;
    affecting friendship, 115;
    aristocratic, 124;
    among the rich, 143;
    ignorance about English, 267, 268;
    concomitant of wealth, 297;
    not enjoyed, 302;
    William of Orange's, 345;
    connection with amusement, 385-401 _passim_.

  Springtime of love, 34.

  Stanford's London Atlas, 274.

  Stars, illustration of crowds, 77.

  Steam, no help to friendship, 337.

  Stein, Baroness von, relations to Goethe, 51-53.

  Stephenson, George, his locomotive not a failure, 293.

  Stowe, Harriet Beecher, her works confounded with George Eliot's, 290.

  Strangers, treatment of by the English and others (Essay XVII.), 239-252
        _passim_.

  Stream, illustration from the impossibility of upward flow, 98.

  Strength, accompanied with exercise, 302.

  Studies: affecting friendship, 111;
    literary and artistic, 400, 401.

  Subjugation, the motive of display of wealth, 145.

  Suez Canal, and superstition, xii.

  Sunbeam, yacht, 138, 139.

  Sunday: French incident, 128, 129;
    allusion, 198;
    supposed law, 281.
    (See _Sabbath_.)

  Sunset, allusion, 31.

  Supernaturalism (Essay XV.), 215-231 _passim_;
    doubts about, 377, 378.

  Superstition and religion (Essay XV.), 215-231 _passim_.

  Surgeon, an artistic, 289.

  Sweden, king of, 308.

  Swedenborgianism, commended to the author, 378.

  Swift, Jonathan, Gulliver's box, 261.

  Swimming: affected by railways, 14;
    in France, 272.

  Switzerland: epithets applied to, 235;
    tourists, 240;
    Alps, 271;
    Goldsmith's travels, 309;
    Doré's travels, 345.

  Sympathy: with an author, 9;
    one of two great powers deciding human intercourse, 11;
    of a married man with a single, 25, 26;
    between parents and children (Essay VI.), 78-98 _passim_;
    between Priests and Women (Essay XIII. part I.), 175-186 _passim_.

  Symposium, antique, allusion, 29.

  Syracuse, siege, 215-217, 229.


  Table: its pleasures comparatively unrestrained, 36;
    former tyranny of hospitality, 101, 102;
    modern customs, appetite affected by sociability, 102;
    excess not required by hospitality, 103;
    French fashion, 105;
    instances of bad manners, 106, 107, 126-128;
    rules of precedence, 130, 131;
    matrons occupied with cares, 140, 141;
    among the rich, 143;
    tyranny, 172;
    English manners towards strangers contrasted with those of other
        nations (Essay XVII.), 239-252;
    _déjeûner_, 273;
    among the rich, 297;
    talk about hunting, 398, 399.

  Talking, contrasted with writing, 354-357.

  Tasso, Bernardo, father of the poet, his letters, 350, 351.

  Taylor, Mrs., relations to Mill, 53-55.

  Telegraphy: under fixed law, 228;
    affecting letters, 324, 325, 331, 361;
    anecdote, 326.

  Telephone, illustration, 336.

  Temper, destroys friendship, 112, 118.

  Temperance, sometimes at war with hospitality, 102-104.

  Tenderness, in letters, 320, 322.

  Tennyson: study of past literature, 13;
    line about brotherhood, 67;
    religious sentiment of In Memoriam, 198;
    loyalty to verse, 289;
    Palace of Art, 386, 400.

  Thackeray, William Makepeace: Rev. Honeyman in The Newcomes, 203;
    Book of Snobs, 242.

  Thames River, 270, 335.

  Theatre: avoidance, 123;
    English travellers like actors, 242;
    gifts of a painter, 341.

  Thélème, Abbaye de, its motto, 165.

  Thierry, Augustin, History of Norman Conquest, 251, 252.

  Thiers, Louis Adolphe, friendship with Mignet, 120, 121.

  Time, forgotten in labor, 31, 32.

  Timidity, taking refuge in correspondence, 356, 357.

  Titles: table precedence, 130;
    estimate in England and on the Continent, 136, 137;
    British regard, 241, 242, 248-252 _passim_;
    French disregard, 248.

  Tolerance: induced by hospitality, 99;
    of amusements, 389.

  Towneley Hall, library, 318.

  Trade: English and social exclusion, 19;
    foolish distinctions, 132-135;
    connection with national peace, 150;
    adaptation of Greek language, 158;
    interference of religion, 171, 174;
    ignorance about English, 265, 266, 268;
    Lancashire, 288;
    careless tradesmen, 360, 361;
    slang, 365.

  Translations: disliked, 154;
    of Hamerton into French, 267.

  Transubstantiation: private opinion and outward form, 169;
    poetic, 190.
    (See _Roman Catholicism_, etc.)

  Trappist, freedom of an earnest, 164, 165.

  Travel: railway illustration, 13-15;
    marriage simile, 44;
    affecting fraternity, 64;
    affecting friendship, 111;
    facilitated, 160;
    in Arabia, 226;
    unsociability (Essay XVII.), 239-252;
    in vans, 261, 262;
    confusion of places, 291;
    dispensing with luxury, 300;
    an untravelled man, 301;
    not cared for, 302;
    cheap conveyances, 304;
    books of, 305;
    Goldsmith's, 309.

  Trees, and Radicals, 282, 283.

  Trinity, denial of, 257.

  Truth, violations (Essay XVI.), 232-238.

  Tudor Family: Mary's reign, 164;
    criminality, 168;
    Mary's persecution, 180.

  Turkey, war with Russia, 278.

  Turner, Joseph Mallord William, aided by Claude, 13.

  Type-writers, effect on correspondence, 333.

  Tyranny: of religion (Essay XII.), 161-174;
    meanest form, 172, 174;
    of majorities, 398.


  Ulysses: literary simile, 29;
    Bow of, 392.

  Understatement. (See _Untruth_.)

  Union of languages and peoples, 148-150.

  Unitarianism: no European sovereign dare profess, 167, 168;
    difficulty with creeds, 172;
    ignorance about, 257.

  United States, advantage of having the same language as England, 150.

  Universe, _univers_, 273-275.

  Universities: degrees, 91;
    French and English, 275, 276;
    Radical members, 284.

  Untruth: an Unrecognized Form of (Essay XVI.), 232-238;
    two methods in painting, 232;
    exaggeration and diminution, 233;
    self-misrepresentation, 234;
    overstatement and understatement illustrated in travelling epithets,
        235;
    dead mediocrity in conversation, 236;
    inadequacy, 237;
    illustration, 238.


  Vanity: national (Essay XIX.), 264-279 _passim_;
    taking offence, 279;
    absence, 301.

  Vice: of classes, 124, 125;
    devilish, 195;
    part of Bohemianism, 295, 296;
    of best society, 297.

  Victoria, Queen: quotation from her diary, 186, 187;
    her oldest son, 385.

  Violin, illustration, 389.

  Viollet-le-Duc, anecdote, 364.

  Virgil, Palmer's constant companion, 313.
    (See _Latin_.)

  Virgin Mary, her influence, 176.
    (See _Eugénie_, etc.)

  Virtue: of classes, 124, 125;
    priestly adherence, 195;
    definition, 208;
    Buffon's and Littré's, 211.

  Visiting, with rich and poor, 139-144.

  Vitriol, in letters, 371.

  Vituperation, priestly, 194.

  Vivisection, feminine dislike, 180.

  Voltaire: quotation about Columbus, 274;
    Goldsmith's interview, 309.

  Vulpius, Christiane, relations to Goethe, 52, 53.


  Wagner, Richard, his Tannhaüser, 388.

  Wales, Prince of, laborious amusements, 385-387.

  Warcopp, Robert, in Plumpton letters, 323, 331.

  Wars: affected by study of languages, 148-150, 151, 160;
    Eugénie's influence, 176;
    divine connection, 215-224;
    caused by national ignorance, 277, 278.

  Waterloo, battle, 153.

  Wave, simile, 251.

  Wealth: affecting fraternity, 66;
    affecting domestic harmony, 77;
    destroying friendship, 114, 116;
    Flux of (Essay IX.), 119-129;
    property variable, influence of changes, 119;
    access of bachelors and the married to society, 120;
    instances of friendship affected by poverty, 121;
    false friends, 122;
    imprudent marriages, 123;
    middle-class instances of contentment, 124;
    aid to refinement, 125;
    dress, 126;
    cards, and other forms of courtesy, superfluities, 127;
    discipline of courtesy, 128;
    rural manners in France, 129;
    Differences (Essay X.), 130-147;
    social precedence, 130;
    land-ownership, 131;
    trade, 132-134;
    _nouveau riche_ and ancestry, 135;
    titles, 136, 137;
    varied enjoyments, 138, 139;
    hospitality, 140-144;
    English appreciation, 144-146;
    undue deference, 146, 147;
    overstatement and understatement, 234;
    assumption, 242;
    plutocracy, 246, 247;
    American inequalities, 248;
    genteel ignorance, 258-260;
    two great advantages, 297, 298;
    small measure, 298;
    connection with Philistinism and Bohemianism, 299-314;
    employs better agents, 359, 360;
    connection with amusements, 383-401.
    (See _Poverty_, etc.)

  Webb, Captain, lost at Niagara, 290.

  Weeds, illustration of Radicalism, 282.

  Weimar: Goethe's home, 52, 57;
    Duke of, 57.

  Wenderholme, Hamerton's story, 378.

  Wesley, John, choice in religion, 173.
    (See _Methodism_.)

  Westbrook, Harriett, relation to Shelley, 46, 47, 97.

  Westminster Abbey, mistaken for another building, 291.

  White, Richard Grant, story, 277.

  Whist, selfishness in, 397.

  William, emperor of Germany, table customs, 103.

  Wine: connection with hospitality, 101-103, 121;
    traders in considered superior, 133;
    ignorance about English use, 268, 269, 270;
    port, 273;
    concomitant of wealth, 297, 298;
    simile, 367.
    (See _Table_, etc.)

  Wives: a pitiful confession, 41;
    George Eliot's position, 45, 46;
    relations to noted husbands, 47-62;
    dread of a wife's kindred, 73;
    unions made by parents, 94-98;
    destroying friendship, 115, 116;
    tired, 144;
    regard of Napoleon III., 225;
    old letters, 322;
    gain from post-cards, 329, 330;
    privacy of letters, 350;
    Montaigne's letter, 251, 252.
    (See _Marriage_, _Women_, etc.)

  Wolf, priestly, 203.

  Wolseley, Sir Garnet, victory, 222, 223, 229.

  Wood, French use of, 272.

  Women: friendship between two, viii, ix;
    absorption in one, 33;
    beauty's attraction, 33, 38, 39;
    passion long preserved, 40;
    relations to certain noted men, 44-62 _passim_;
    sisterly jealousy, 65;
    governed by sentiment, 69;
    adding to home discomfort, 75, 76;
    English incivility, 106;
    French incivility to English, and defence, 106;
    social acuteness, 130;
    Priests and Women (Essay XIII.), 175-204;
    dislike of fixed rules, 175;
    persuasive powers, ruling society, 176;
    dependence, advisers, 177;
    _love_, 178;
    gentleness, 179;
    sympathy with persecution, 180;
    harm of both frivolity and seriousness, 181;
    injustice of female sex, anxiety for sympathy, 182;
    sensitiveness, 183;
    services desired at special times, 184;
    motherhood, 185;
    consolation, 186;
    æsthetic nature, 187;
    fondness for show, 188;
    dress, 189;
    churches, 190;
    worship in music, 191;
    eloquence, 192;
    eager for the right, 194;
    obstinacy, 195;
    association in benevolence, 196;
    love of ceremony, 197;
    festivals, 198;
    confidence in a clergyman, 199;
    marriage formerly disapproved, _clergywomen_, 200;
    relief in confession, 201, 202;
    gentlewomen's letters, 205, 206;
    French, among strangers, 242, 243;
    want of analysis, 280;
    strong theological interest, 377-380;
    old maids, 379-382;
    gentlewomen, 381, 382;
    not interested in sporting talk, 399.
    (See _Marriage_, _Wives_, etc.)

  Word, power of a, 118.

  Wordsworth: indebtedness to the poor, 22;
    on Nature's loyalty, 30;
    instance of his uncleanness, 311.

  Work, softens solitude, 31, 32.

  Working-men. (See _Lower Classes_.)

  World, possible enjoyment of, 303.

  Worship: word in wedding-service, 62;
    limited by locality, 171-174;
    musical, 191;
    expressions in letters, 321.

  Writing, a new discovery supposed, 336.

  Wryghame, message by, 320.

  Wycherley, William, his ribaldry, 181.


  Yachting, 258, 259, 292, 358.
    (See _Boating_.)

  York: Minster, 190;
    archbishop, 222;
    diocese, 275.

  Yorkshire, letter to, 320.

  Youth: contrasted with age, 87-89;
    nonsense reproduced by Shakspeare, 89;
    insult, 107;
    in friendship, 111, 112;
    acceptance of kindness, 117;
    semblance caused by ignorance of a language, 151.


  Zeus, a hunter compared to, 391.


THE END.

University Press: John Wilson & Son, Cambridge.




FOOTNOTES:

[1] An expression used to me by a learned Doctor of Oxford.

[2] The causes of this curious repulsion are inquired into elsewhere in
this volume.

[3] The exact degree of blame due to Shelley is very difficult to
determine. He had nothing to do with the suicide, though the separation
was the first in a train of circumstances that led to it. It seems clear
that Harriett did not desire the separation, and clear also that she did
nothing to assert her rights. Shelley ought not to have left her, but he
had not the patience to accept as permanent the consequences of a mistaken
marriage.

[4] Lewes's "Life of Goethe."

[5] Only a poet can write of his private sorrows. In prose one cannot
sing,--

  "A dirge for her, the doubly dead, in that she died so young."

[6] Schuyler's "Peter the Great."

[7] That valiant enemy of false pretensions, Mr. Punch, has often done
good service in throwing ridicule on unreal distinctions. In "Punch's
Almanack" for 1882 I find the following exquisite conversation beneath one
of George Du Maurier's inimitable drawings:

    _Grigsby._ Do you know the Joneses?

    _Mrs. Brown._ No, we--er--don't care to know _Business_ people, as a
    rule, although my husband's in business; but then he's in the _Coffee_
    business,--and they're all GENTLEMEN in the _Coffee_ business, you
    know!

    _Grigsby_ (who always suits himself to his company). _Really_, now!
    Why, that's more than can be said of the Army, the Navy, the Church,
    the Bar, or even the _House of Lords_! I don't _wonder_ at your being
    rather _exclusive_!

[8] I am often amused by the indignant feelings of English journalists on
this matter. Some French newspaper calls an Englishman a lord when he is
not a lord, and our journalists are amazed at the incorrigible ignorance
of the French. If Englishmen cared as little about titles they would be
equally ignorant, and two or three other things are to be said in defence
of the French journalist that English critics _never_ take into account.
They suppose that because Gladstone is commonly called Mr. a Frenchman
ought to know that he cannot be a lord. That does not follow. In France a
man may be called Monsieur and be a baron at the same time. A Frenchman
may answer, "If Gladstone is not a lord, why do you call him one? English
almanacs not only say that Gladstone is a lord, but that he is the very
First Lord of the Treasury. Again, why am I not to speak of Sir
Chamberlain? I have seen a printed letter to him beginning with 'Sir,'
which is plain evidence that your 'Sir' is the equivalent of our
_Monsieur_." A Frenchman is surely not to be severely blamed if he is not
aware that the First Lord of the Treasury is not a lord at all, and that a
man who is called a "Sir" inside every letter addressed to him has no
right to that title on the envelope.

[9] That of M. Léopold Double.

[10] I need hardly say that this is not intended as a description of poor
men's hospitality generally, but only of the effects of poverty on
hospitality in certain cases. The point of the contrast lies in the
difference between this uncomfortable hospitality, which a lover of
pleasant human intercourse avoids, with the easy and agreeable hospitality
that the very same people would probably have offered if they had
possessed the conveniences of wealth.

[11] Italian, to me, seems Latin made natural.

[12] So far as the State and society generally are concerned; but there
are private situations in which even a member of the State Church does not
enjoy perfect religious liberty. Suppose the case (I am describing a real
case) of a lady left a widow and in poverty. Her relations are wealthy
Dissenters. They offer to provide for her handsomely if she will renounce
the Church of England and join their own sect. Does she enjoy religious
liberty? The answer depends upon the question whether she is able to earn
her own living or not. If she is, she can secure religious freedom by
incessant labor; if she is unable to earn her living she will have no
religious freedom, although she belongs, in conscience, to the most
powerful religion in the State. In the case I am thinking of, the lady had
the honorable courage to open a little shop, and so remained a member of
the Church of England; but her freedom was bought by labor and was
therefore not the same thing as the best freedom, which is unembittered by
sacrifice.

[13] The phrase adopted by Court journalists in speaking of such a
conversion is, "The Princess has received instruction in the religion
which she will adopt on her marriage," or words to that effect, just as if
different and mutually hostile religions were not more contradictory of
each other than sciences, and as if a person could pass from one religion
to another with no more twisting and wrenching of previous beliefs than he
would incur in passing from botany to geology.

[14] The word "generally" is inserted here because women do apparently
sometimes enjoy the infliction of undeserved pain on other creatures. They
grace bull-fights with their presence, and will see horses disembowelled
with apparent satisfaction. It may be doubted, too, whether the Empress of
Austria has any compassion for the sufferings of a fox.

[15] I have purposely omitted from the text another cause for feminine
indifference to the work of persecutors, but it may be mentioned
incidentally. At certain times those women whose influence on persons in
authority might have been effectively employed in favor of the oppressed
were too frivolous or even too licentious for their thoughts to turn
themselves to any such serious matter. This was the case in England under
Charles II. The contrast between the occupations of such women as these
and the sufferings of an earnest man has been aptly presented by
Macaulay:--

    "The ribaldry of Etherege and Wycherley was, in the presence and under
    the special sanction of the head of the Church, publicly recited by
    female lips in female ears, while the author of the 'Pilgrim's
    Progress' languished in a dungeon, for the crime of proclaiming the
    gospel to the poor."

This is deplorable enough; but on the whole I do not think that the
frivolity of light-minded women has been so harmful to noble causes as the
readiness with which serious women place their immense influence at the
service of constituted authorities, however wrongfully those authorities
may act. Ecclesiastical authorities especially may quietly count upon this
kind of support, and they always do so.

[16] Since this Essay was written I have met with the following passage in
Her Majesty's diary, which so accurately describes the consolatory
influence of clergymen, and the natural desire of women for the
consolation given by them, that I cannot refrain from quoting it. The
Queen is speaking of her last interview with Dr. Norman Macleod:--

    "He dwelt then, as always, on the love and goodness of God, and on his
    conviction that God would give us, in another life, the means to
    perfect ourselves and to improve gradually. No one ever felt so
    convinced, and so anxious as he to convince others, that God was a
    loving Father who wished all to come to Him, and to preach of a living
    personal Saviour, One who loved us as a brother and a friend, to whom
    all could and should come with trust and confidence. No one ever
    raised and strengthened one's faith more than Dr. Macleod. His own
    faith was so strong, his heart so large, that all--high and low, weak
    and strong, the erring and the good--_could alike find sympathy, help,
    and consolation from him_."

    "_How I loved to talk to him, to ask his advice, to speak to him of my
    sorrows and anxieties._"

A little farther on in the same diary Her Majesty speaks of Dr. Macleod's
beneficial influence upon another lady:--

    "He had likewise a marvellous power of winning people of all kinds,
    and of sympathizing with the highest and with the humblest, and of
    soothing and comforting the sick, the dying, the afflicted, the
    erring, and the doubting. _A friend of mine told me that if she were
    in great trouble, or sorrow, or anxiety, Dr. Norman Macleod was the
    person she would wish to go to._"

The two points to be noted in these extracts are: first, the faith in a
loving God who cares for each of His creatures individually (not acting
only by general laws); and, secondly, the way in which the woman goes to
the clergyman (whether in formal confession or confidential conversation)
to hear consolatory doctrine from his lips in application to her own
personal needs. The faith and the tendency are both so natural in women
that they could only cease in consequence of the general and most
improbable acceptance by women of the scientific doctrine that the Eternal
Energy is invariably regular in its operations and inexorable, and that
the priest has no clearer knowledge of its inscrutable nature than the
layman.

[17] These quotations (I need hardly say) are from Macaulay's History,
