CHAPTER LXVIII.

ON THE VIRTUES OF TACITURNITY.

Argument:--Four kinds of Reticence, and their respective qualities.


Vasishtha said:--Ráma! remain as taciturn as in your silent sleep, and
shun at a distance the musings of your mind; get rid of the vagaries of
your imagination, and remain firm in the state Brahma.

2. Ráma said:--I know what is meant by the reticence of speech, and the
quietness of the organs, and the muteness of a block of wood; but tell
me what is sleep like silence, which you well know by practice.

3. Vasishtha replied:--It is said to be of two kinds, by the mute like
munis and the reserved sages of old; the practiced by the wood like
statues of saints, and the other observed by those that are liberated
in their life time (jívan mukta).

4. The wood like devotee is that austere ascetic, who is not meditative
in his mind, and is firmly employed in the discharge of the rigorous
rites of religion; he practises the painful restraints of his bodily
organs, and remains speechless as a wooden statue.

5. The other kind of living liberated Yogi is one, who looks at the
world ever as before (with his usual unconcern); who delights in his
meditation of the soul, and passes as any ordinary man without any
distinctive mark of his religious order or secular rank.

6. The condition of these two orders of saintly and holy men, which is
the fixedness of their minds and sedateness of their souls, is what
passes under the title of taciturnity and saintliness (_mauna_ and
muni) (who hold their tongue and their peace, and walk _sub silentio_
and _incognito_ on earth).

7. Thus the taciturn sages reckon four kinds of latitancy, which they
style severally by the names of reservedness in speech, restriction of
the organs, woodlike speechlessness and dead like silence as in one's
sleep.

8. Oral silence consists in keeping one's mouth and lips close, and the
closeness of the senses implies the keeping of the members of the body
under strict control; the rigorous muteness means the abandonment of
all efforts, and the sleepy silence is as silent as the grave.

9. There is a fifth kind of dead-like silence, which occurs in the
austere ascetic in his state of insensibility; in the profound
meditation of the dormant _Yogi_, and in the mental abstraction of the
living liberated.

10. All the three prior states of reticence, occur in the austere
devotee, and the sleepy or dead silence is what betakes the living
liberated only.

11. Though speechlessness is called silence, yet it does not constitute
pure reticence, in as much as the mute tongue may brood evil thoughts
in the mind, which lead to the bondage of men.

12. The austere devotee continues in his reticence, without minding
his own egoism, or seeing the visibles or listening to the speech of
others; and seeing nothing beside him, he sees all in himself, like
living fire covered under ashes.

13. The mind being busy in these three states of silence, and indulging
its fancies and reveries at liberty; makes munis of course in outward
appearance, but there is no one, who understands the nature of God.

14. There is nothing of that blessed divine knowledge in any of these,
which is so very desirable to all mankind; I vouch it freely that
they are not knowers of God, be they angry at it or not as they may.
(Vasishtha being a theoretic philosopher, finds fault with every kind
of practical Yoga or pseudo hypnotism).

15. But this dormant or meditative silent sage, who is liberated from
all bonds and cares in his life time, is never to be born in any shape
in this world, and it is interesting to know much of them as I will
recite to you.

16. He does not require to restrain his respiration, nor needs the
triple restraint of his speech; he does not rejoice at his prosperity,
nor is he depressed in adversity, but preserves his equanimity and
the evenness of his sensibility at all times. (He sticks to what is
natural, and does not resort to anything artificial).

17. His mind is under the guidance of his reason, and is neither
excited by nor restrained from its fancies, it is neither restless
nor dormant, and exists as it is not in existence. (owing to its even
mindedness).

18. His attention is neither divided nor pent up, but fixed in the
infinite and eternal one, and his mind cogitates unconfined the nature
of things. Such a one is said to be the sleeping silent sage.

19. He who knows the world as it is, and is not led to error by its
deluding varieties, and whoso scans everything as it is without being
led to scepticism, is the man that is styled the sleeping silent sage.

20. He who relies his faith and trust, on the one endless and ever
felicitous Siva, as the aggregate of all knowledge, and the displayer
of this universe, is the one who is known as the sleeping silent sage.

21. He who sees the _vacuum_ as the _plenum_, and views this all
_omnium_ as the null and nullum; and whose mind is even and tranquil,
is the man who is called the sleeping silent sage.

22. Again he who views the universe as neither reality nor unreality
either, but all an empty vacuum and without a substratum, but full
of peace and divine wisdom, is said to be in the best state of his
taciturnity.

23. The mind that is unconscious of the effects, of the different
states of its prosperity and adversity and of its plenty and wants, is
said to rest in its highest state of rest and quiet.

24. That perfect equanimity of the mind and evenness of temper, which
is not liable to change or fluctuation; with a clear conscience and
unflinching self-consciousness, are the source of an unimpairing
reticence.

25. The consciousness that I am nothing, nor is there anything besides;
and that the mind and its thoughts, are no other in reality (than
fictions of the intellect); is the real source of taciturnity.

26. The knowledge that the ego pervades this universe, which is the
representation of the "one that is"; and whose essence is displayed
equally in all things, is what is meant by the state of sleepy silence.
(_i.e._ the man that has known this grand truth, remains dumb and mute
and has nothing to say).

27. Now as it is the consciousness which constitutes all and
everything, how can you conceive your distinction from others, who are
actuated by the same power, dwelling alike in all? It is this knowledge
which is called the ever lasting sleep, and forms the ground work of
every kind of silence.

28. This is the silence of profound sleep, and because it is an endless
sleep in the ever wakeful God, this sleep is alike to waking. Know this
as the fourth stage of _Yoga_, or rather a stage above the same.

29. This profound trance is called hypnotism or the fourth state of
entranced meditation; and the tranquillity which is above this state,
is to be had in one's waking state.

30. He that is situated in his fourth stage of yoga, has a clear
conscience and quiet peace attending on him. This is practicable by
the adept even in his waking state, and is obtainable by the righteous
soul, both in its embodied as well as disembodied states.

31. Yes, O Ráma! Be you desirous to be settled in this state, and know
that neither I or you nor any other person is any real being in this
world, which exists only as a reflexion of our mind, and therefore the
wise man should rely only in the bosom of the vacuous intellect, which
comprehends all things in it.




