CHAPTER CXVIII.

CONTINUATION OF THE SAME.

Argument:--Manu's answers to the other questions of Ikshaku as "Whence
is this creation &c."


Manu continued:--It is by the divine will, that the living souls of
beings are evolved from the original intellect, (in which they are
contained), as the waves rise from the main body of waters contained in
the ocean.

2. These living souls, retain the tendencies of their prior states in
former births, and are thereby led to move in their course of light
or ignorance etc. in this world, and to accordingly subject either to
happiness or misery, which is felt by the mind and never affects the
soul itself.

3. The invisible soul is known in the knowable mind, which is actuated
by it (the soul); as the invisible node of Rahu, becomes visible to
us in the eclipse of the moon (which is affected by it): (so the
mind acting under the impulse of the soul, becomes liable to pain or
pleasure according to its desert).

4. Neither the preceptor of sástras nor the lectures of our spiritual
preceptors, can show the supreme spirit before our sight; but it is our
spirit which shows us the holy spirit, when our understanding rests in
its own true essence (apart from its egoism and meism).

5. As travellers are seen to be journeying abroad with their minds,
free from all attainment and aversion to any particular object or spot;
so the self-liberated souls are found to sojourn in this world, quite
unconcerned even with their bodies and the objects of their senses.

6. It is not for good and Godly men either to pamper or famish their
bodies, or quicken or weaken their senses; but to allow them to be
employed with their objects at their own option.

7. Be of an indifferent mind (udásina) with regard to your bodies and
all external objects; and enjoy the cool composure of your soul, by
betaking yourself entirely to your spirituality.

8. The knowledge that "I am an embodied being" is the cause of our
bondage in this world; and therefore it is never to be entertained by
them, that are seekers of their liberation.

9. But the firm conviction that "I am no other than an intellectual
being, and as rarefied as the pure air"; is the only belief that is
able to extricate our souls from their bondage in this world.

10. As the light of the sun pierces and shines, both within and without
the surface of a clear sheet of water; so doth the light of the Holy
spirit, penetrate and shine both inside and outside of the pure souls
of men, as well as in everything else.

11. As it is the variety of formation, that makes the various kinds
of ornaments out of the same substance of gold; so it is the various
dispositions of the one soul, that makes the difference of things in
the world. (The same soul exhibiting itself in sundry forms).

12. The world resembles the vast ocean, and all its created are
like the waves upon its surface; they rise for a moment, only to be
succumbed to the latent flame of their insatiable desires.

13. Know all the worlds to be absorbed in the vast ocean of the
universal soul of God, as all things are devoured by death or time
(Kála), and lie buried like the ocean itself in the insatiable womb of
Agastya or Eternity.

14. Cease to consider the bodies of men as their souls, and to behold
the visibles in a spiritual light; rely solely in thy spiritual self,
and sit retired from all except alone with thyself.

15. Men are seen foolishly to wail for the loss of their souls, though
lying within themselves; as a fond mother moans on missing her child,
forgetful of its sleeping upon her lap. (We miss our souls though
situated within ourselves).

16. Men bewail for themselves as lost upon the loss of their bodies,
and exclaim as it saying "Oh I am dead and gone" and so on, not knowing
that their souls are ever undecaying and imperishable.

17. As the fluctuation of water shows many forms upon its surface,
so the will of God exhibits the forms of all things in the divine
Intellect. (Just as the active principle of our imagination, represents
endless varieties of scenes in the mirror of our minds).

18. Now king, keep the steadiness of your mind, repress thy imagination
and the flights of thy fancy; call thy thoughts home and confine
them to thyself; remain calm and cool and unperturbed amidst all
perturbations, and go and rule thy realm with thy self possession.




CHAPTER CXIX.

THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED.

Argument.--On the Expansion of Divine Powers, and the Perfection of
Human Soul.


Manu resumed:--The Lord with his creative power exerts his active
energy, and plays the part of a restless boy (in his formation of the
worlds); and again by his power of re-absorption he engulphs all into
himself, and remains in his lonesome solity.

2. As it is his volition that gives rise to his active energy for
action, so it is his nolition that causes the cessation of his
exertion, and the intromission of the whole creation in himself.

3. As the light of the luminous sun, moon and fire, and as the lustre
of brilliant gems spread themselves on all sides; and as the leaves of
trees put forth of themselves, and as the waters of a cataract scatter
their liquid particles all about.

4. So it is the lustration of divine glory, which displays itself in
the works of creation; which appears to be intolerable to the ignorant,
who know not that it is the self-same god though appearing to be
otherwise.

5. O! it is a wondrous illusion that has deluded the whole world, which
does not perceive the divine spirit, that pervades every part of the
universe.

6. He who looks on the world as a scenery painted in the tablet of the
Divine Intellect, and remains unimpressible and undesirous of every
thing, and quite content in his soul, has put an invulnerable armour
upon himself (which no dart of error has the power to pierce).

7. How happy is he who having nothing, no wealth nor support, has yet
his all by thinking himself as the all intelligent soul.

8. The idea that this is pleasurable and the other is painful, being
the sole cause of all pains and anxiety, it is the consuming of these
feelings by the fire of our indifference to them, that prevents the
access of pain and affliction unto us.

9. Use, Oh King! the weapon of your restless anaesthesia (samádhi), and
cut in twain the feeling of the agreeable and disagreeable, and pare
asunder your sensation of love and hatred by the sword of your manly
equanimity.

10. Clear the entangled jungle of ceremonious rites (karma kanda), by
the tool of your disregard of the merit or demerit of acts (dharma
adharma); and relying in the tenuity of your soul (as rarer than the
rarefied air), shake off all sorrow and grief from you.

11. Knowing thy soul to be full of all worldly possessions, and driving
all differences from thy mind, bind thyself solely to reason (viveka)
and be free from all fabrications (kalpaná) of mankind; know the
supreme bliss of the soul, and be as perfect and unfailing as itself,
and being embodied in the intellectual mind, remain quite calm and
transparent, and aloof from all the fears and cares of the world.




