CHAPTER LXX.

INTERROGATORIES OF VETÁLA.

Arguments:--Conversation of a prince and a Vetála, and Dissipation of
Error and manifestation of truth.


Vasishtha resumed:--Life becomes no life (becomes immortal), and the
mind turns to no mind, immerges in the soul; no sooner is the cloud of
ignorance dispersed by the bright sun beams of right reason. This is
the state which is termed _moksha_ or liberation (from error) by the
wise.

2. The mind and its egoism and tuism (subjectivity and objectivity),
appear as water in the mirage, but all these unrealities vanish away,
no sooner we come to our right reason;

3. Attend now to the queries of a vetála, which I come to remember
at present, concerning our erroneous and dreaming conception of the
phenomenal world, and which will serve to example by the subject of our
last lecture.

4. There lived a gigantic vetála in the vast wilderness of the Vindhya
mountains, who happened to come out on an excursion to the adjoining
districts in search of his prey of human beings.

5. He used to live before in the neighbourhood of a populous city,
where he lived quite happy and well satisfied with the victims; which
were daily offered to him by the good citizens.

6. He never killed a human being without some cause or harm, although
he roved through the city, pinched by hunger and thirst. He walked in
the ways of the honest and equitable men in the place.

7. It came to pass in course of time that he went out of the city, to
reside in his woody retreat; where he never killed any man, except when
pressed by excessive hunger, and when he thought it was equitable for
him to do so.

8. He happened to meet there once a ruler of the land, strolling about
in his nightly round; to whom he cried out in a loud and appalling
voice.

9. The vetála exclaimed:--Where goest thou, O prince, said he, thou art
now caught in the clutches of a hideous monster, thou art now a dead
man, and hast become my ration of this day.

10. The ruler replied:--Beware, O nocturnal fiend! that I will break
thy skull into a thousand pieces, if you will unjustly attempt to kill
me by force at this spot, and make thy ration of me.

11. The vetála rejoined:--I do not tell thee unjustly, and speak it
rightly unto thee; that as thou art a ruler, it is thy duty to attend
to the petition of every body (wherein if thou failest, thou surely
diest before me).

12. I request thee, O prince! to solve the questions that I propose
to thee; because I believe thou art best able to give a full and
satisfactory answer to every one of them. (These questions are dark
enigmas, which are explained in the next chapter).

13. Who is that glorious sun, the particles of whose rays, are seen to
glitter in the surrounding worlds: and what is that wind (or force),
which wafts these dusts of stars, in the infinite space of vacuum.

14. What is that self-same thing, which passes from one dream to
another, and assumes different forms by hundreds and thousands, and yet
does not forsake its original form.

15. Tell me what is that pithy particle in bodies, which is enveloped
under a hundred folds or sheaths, which are laid over and under one
another, like the coats or lamina of a plantain tree.

16. What is that minute atom which is imperceptible to the eye, and yet
produces this immeasurable universe, with its stupendous worlds and
skies, and the prodigious planets on high and mountains below, which
are the minutest of that minute particle.

17. What is that shapeless and formless thing atom, which remains as
the pith and marrow under the rocks of huge mountains, and which is the
substratum of the triple world (of heaven, earth and infernal regions).

18. If you, O wicked soul, fail to answer to these queries, then shalt
thou be a killer of thyself, by your being made my food this moment.
And know that at the end, I will devour all thy people, as the regent
of death destroys every body in the world.




CHAPTER LXXI.

THE PRINCE'S REPLY TO THE FIRST QUESTION OF THE VETÁLA.

Arguments:--Answer to the first question regarding the Prime cause
of all, shows the infinite worlds to be the trees and fruits of that
original root.


Vasishtha related:--The Rájá smiled at hearing these questions of the
Demon, and as he opened his mouth to give the reply, the lustre of
his pearly teeth, shed a brightness on the white vault of the sky.
(This shows how much the early Hindus prized their white teeth, though
latterly they tinged them with blue vitriol).

2. This world was at first a rudimentary granule (in the Divine mind),
and was afterwards encrusted by a dozen of elemental sheaths as its
pellicles, skin and bark. (Does it mean the component elements or
layers _Bhúta-tatwa_ or _Bhú-tatwa_).

3. The tree which bears thousands of such fruits, is very high also
with its equally out stretching branches, and very long and broad
leaves likewise.

4. This great tree is of a huge size and very astounding to sight; it
has thousands of prodigious branches spreading wide on every side.

5. There are thousands of such trees, and a dense forest of many other
large trees and plants in that person.

6. Thousands of such forests stretch over it, abounding in thousands of
mountains with their elevated peaks.

7. The wide extended tracts which contain these mountains, have also
very large valleys and dales amidst in them.

8. These wide spread tracts contain also many countries, with their
adjacent islands and lakes and rivers too.

9. These thousands of islands also contain many cities, with varieties
of edifices and works of art.

10. These thousands tracts of lands, which are sketched out as so many
continents, are as so many earths and worlds in their extent.

11. That which contains thousands of such worlds, as the mundane eggs,
is as unlimited as the spacious womb of the firmament.

12. That which contains thousands of such eggs in its bosom, bears also
many thousands of seas and oceans resting calmly in its ample breast.

13. That which displays the boisterous waves of seas, is the sprightly
and sportive soul, heaving as the clear waters of the ocean.

14. That which contains thousands of such oceans, with all their waters
in his unconscious womb, is the God Vishnu who filled the universal
ocean with his all pervasive spirit. (And the spirit of God floated
on the face of the waters, Moses. The waters were the first abode of
Náráyana).

15. That which bears thousands of such Gods, as a string of pearls
about the neck, is the Great God Rudra.

16. That which bears thousands of such Great Gods Mahádevas, in the
manner of the hairs on his person; is the supreme Lord God of all.

17. He is that great sun that he shines in a hundred such persons of
the Gods, all of whom are but frictions of the rays of that Great
source of light and life.

18. All things in the universe are but particles of that uncreated sun;
and thus have I explained to you that Intellectual sun, who fills the
world with his rays, and shows them light.

19. The all knowing soul is the supreme sun that enlightens the world,
and fills all things in it with particles of its rays. (The soul is the
sun, whose light of knowledge manifests all things unto us).

20. It is the Omniscient soul, which is that surpassing sun, whose
rays produce and show everything to light; and without which as in the
absence of the solar light, nothing would grow nor be visible in the
outer world. (The sun's heat and light are the life and shower of the
sight of the world).

21. All living beings who have their souls enlightened by the light
of philosophy, behold the sphere of the universe to be a blaze of the
gemming sun of the intellect; and there is not the least tinge of the
erroneous conceptions of the material world in it. Know this and hold
your peace.[A]

[A] By a figure of speech light and knowledge are synonymous terms, and
so are their sources the sun and soul interchangeable to one another.
And as the Divine spirit is the creator of all things, so is the sun
producer and grower of everything in the visible world. Hence has risen
the mistake of taking the sun--the savitar or producer for the Divine
soul the creator among the sun worshippers, who believe the sun to be
the soul of the universe. (Súrya atmájagatah in the sruti). Hence has
grown the popular error of address in the Gáyatrí hymn to the sun,
which was used as an invocation of the supreme soul, and is still
understood as such by theists.




