CHAPTER LVII.

ON ABANDONMENT OF DESIRE AND ITS RESULT OF TRANQUILLITY.

Argument:--The final lecture to Arjuna on the Peace of mind resulting
from its want of desire.


The Lord said:--Look here, O Arjuna! The great wonder which is manifest
in this subject; it is the appearance of the picture, prior to that
of the plane of the plan upon which it is drawn. (The appearance of
the mind or painting, before that of Viráj or the spirit of God which
exhibits the painting. Gloss).

2. The prominence of the painting and the non-appearance of its basis,
must be as wonderous as the buoyancy of a block of stone, and the
sinking down of gourd shell as is shown in a magic play.

3. The Universe resting in the vacuity of the Divine spirit, appears
as a picture on the tablet of the mind; say then how does this egoism
or self knowledge of your substantiality, arise from the bosom of
the vacuous nullity. (_i.e._ How can substantial spring from the
unsubstantial, or some thing come out of nothing).

4. All these being the vacant production of vacuum, are swallowed up
likewise in the vacuous womb of an infinite vacuity; they are no more
than hollow shadows of emptiness, and stretched out in empty air.

5. This empty air is spread over with the snare of our desires,
stretching as wide as the sphere of these outstretched worlds; it is
the band of our desire that encircles the worlds as their great belt.

6. The world is situated in Brahmá as a reflexion in the mirror, and is
not subject to partition or obliteration; owing to its inherence in its
receptacle, and its identity with the same.

7. The indissoluble vacuum being the nature of Brahma, is inseparable
from his essence; for nobody is ever able to divide the empty air in
twain or remove it from its place.

8. It is owing to your ignorance of this, that your concupiscence has
become congenial with your nature; which it is hard for it to get rid
of, notwithstanding its being fraught with every virtue.

9. He who has sown the smallest seed of desire in the soul of his
heart, is confined as a lion in the cage, though he may be very wise
and learned in all things.

10. The desire which is habitual to one, grows as rank as a thick wood
in his breast; unless it is burnt away in the seed by the knowledge of
truth, when it cannot vegetate any more.

11. This mind is no more inclined to any thing, who has burnt away the
seed of his desire at once; he remains untouched by pleasure and pain,
like the lotus-leaf amidst the water.

12. Now therefore, O Arjuna! do you remain calm and quiet in your
spirit, be undaunted and devoid of all desire in your mind; melt
down the mist of your mental delusion by the heat of your _nirvána_
devotion, and from all that you have learnt from my holy lecture to
you, remain in perfect tranquillity with your reliance in the Supreme
spirit.




CHAPTER LVIII.

ARJUNA'S SATISFACTION AT THE SERMON.

Argument:--The knowledge of truth dispels the doubts, and leads to
display his valorous deeds in warfare.


Arjuna said:--Lord! it is by thy kindness, that I am freed from my
delusion, and have come to the reminiscence of myself. I am now placed
above all doubts, and will act as you have said.

2. The Lord replied:--when you find the feelings and faculties of
your heart and mind, to be fully pacified by means of your knowledge;
then understand your soul to have attained its tranquillity, and the
property of goodness or purity of its nature. (Sattwa Swabháva).

3. In this state, the soul becomes insensible of all mental thoughts,
and full of intelligence in itself; and being freed from all inward and
outward perceptions, it perceives in itself the one Brahma who is all
and everywhere.

4. No worldly being can observe this elevated state of the soul, as no
body can see the bird that has fled from the earth into the upper sky.

5. The pure soul which is devoid of desire, becomes full of
intelligence and spiritual light; and it is not to be perceived by even
the foresighted observer. (It is the soul's approximation to the Divine
state).

6. No body can perceive this transcendental and transparent state of
the soul, without purifying his desires at first; it is a state as
imperceptible to the impure, as the minutest particle of an atom, is
unperceivable by the naked eye.

7. Attainment of this state, drives away the knowledge of all sensible
objects as of pots, plates, and others. What thing therefore is so
desirable, as to be worth desiring before the Divine presence.

8. As the frost and ice melt away before a volcanic mountain, so doth
our ignorance fly afar, from the knowledge of the intellectual soul.
(_i.e._ Intellectual knowledge drives away all ignorance before it).

9. What are these mean desires of us, that blow away like the dust of
the earth, and what are our possessions and enjoyments but snares to
entangle our souls?

10. So long doth our ignorance (avidyá) flaunt herself in her various
shapes, as we remain ignorant of the pure and modest nature of our
inmost souls in ourselves. (Self-knowledge is shy and modest, while
ignorance is full of vanity and boast).

11. All outward appearances fade away and faint (before the naked eye),
and appear in their pellucid forms in the inmost soul, which grasps the
whole in itself, as the vacuum contains the plenum in it.

12. That which shows all forms in it, without having or showing
any form of itself; is that transcendent substance which is beyond
description, and transcends our comprehension of it.

13. Now get rid of the poisonous and cholic pain of your desire of
gain, as also of the permanence of your own existence; mutter to
yourself the mantra of your resignation of desirables, and thus prosper
in the world without fear for anything.

14. Vasishtha said:--After the Lord of the three worlds had spoken the
words, Arjuna remained silent for a moment before him; and then like
a bee sitting beside a blue lotus, uttered the following words to the
sable bodied Krishna.

15. Arjuna said:--Lord! Thy words have dispelled all grief from my
heart, and the light of truth is rising in my mind; as when the sun
rises to awaken the closed and sleeping lotus.

16. Vasishtha said:--After saying so, Arjuna being cleared of all
his doubts, laid hold on his Gándíva bow, and rose with Hari for his
charioteer, in order to proceed to his warlike exploits.

17. He will transform the face of the earth to a sea of blood, gushing
out of the bodies of combatants, their charioteers and horses and
elephants that will be wounded by him; the flights of his arrows and
thickening darts, will hide the disk of the sun in the sky, and darken
the face of the earth with flying dust.




