CHAPTER CXXI.

CONTINUATION OF THE SAME.

Argument.--The causes of the Elevation and degradation of living being.


Manu continued:--The soul is originally full of bliss by its nature,
but being subject to ignorance, it fosters its vain desire for temporal
enjoyment, whence it has the name of the living soul (which is
subjected to misery). This corresponds with the scriptural doctrine,
that man was originally made in the image of his Maker (_i.e._ full of
bliss); but being tempted by delusion to taste the forbidden sweetness,
became the mortal and miserable human soul.

2. But when the desire of pleasure, is lessened by the _viveka_ or
discriminative knowledge of man, he forsakes his nature of a living and
mortal being, and his soul becomes one with the supreme spirit. (Man by
his knowledge retrieves his godly nature).

3. Do not therefore allow your desire of earthly enjoyment, to draw
your soul up and down to heaven and hell; as a bucket tied in its neck
with a cord, is cast down and again lifted up from a well.

4. Those selfish folks who claim something as theirs from that of
another, are grossly mistaken and led into error, and are destined like
the dragging bucket to descend lower and lower. (The more niggardliness
the more degradation or the more selfishness the greater baseness).

5. He who gets rid of his knowledge that, this is I and that is
another, and that this is mine and that is the others, gradually
rises higher and higher according to his greater disinterestedness.
(Disinterestedness characterises an elevated mind).

6. Delay not to rely your dependance in your enlightened and elevated
soul, stretching over and filling the whole space of the sky, end
comprehending all the worlds in it. (This magnanimity is characteristic
of the catholicity of Hindu religion).

7. When the human mind is thus elevated and expanded beyond all limits,
it then approaches the divine mind, and is assimilated to it. (This
extinction is called its nirvána).

8. Any one who has arrived to this state, may well think in himself to
be able to effect whatever was done by the Gods Brahmá, Vishnu, Indra
(by his intellectual body Varuna and others; who were of such elevated
souls and minds).

9. Whatever acts are attributed to any of the Gods or other persons, is
no more than the display of divine pleasure in that form.

10. Whoso is assimilated to the divine intellect, and has become
deathless and unmindful of his mortal state, has a share of supreme
felicity for his enjoyment, which bears no comparison: (unspeakable
delight attends on the soul of the spiritualist).

11. Continue to think this world as neither a vacuum nor a plenum; nor
a material or spiritual substance. It is neither an intellectual being,
nor a quite insensible thing.[A]

[A] Should you think it a nullity by the Sruti which says _neti-neti_
it is naught, you deny the creatorship of God, who has created it as
something substantial and tangible.

Again on the other hand, if you consider it as a hypostatic reality,
you introduce in that case positive duality, beside the reality of
one unity alone. So every other position being liable to objection,
you must think it as neither the one nor the other, but as something
incomprehensible, or reflexion of the Divine Mind.

12. By thinking in this way, you will have composure of your
disposition, or else there is no separate place or time or condition
for your liberation or salvation.

13. It is by the absence of our egoism and ignorance, that we get rid
of our personal existence, and it is our contemplation of the nature
of God, and his presence before us in our meditation (sákshat kára) of
him, that constitutes our _moksha_ or liberation.

14. It is the even delight and perpetual tranquillity of the soul, that
constitutes our bliss and liberation; and these are to be obtained by
means of calm and cool reasoning in the sense of sástras, avoiding all
impatience and fickleness of our mind and temper, and the pleasure
derived from our taste in poetry and light studies and trifling
amusement. (It requires us to be free from the fluctuations of our
desires and options of which there is no end).




CHAPTER CXXII.

THE SAME. MANU'S ADMONITION TO IKSHAKU.

Argument.--On the Elevation of Humanity and its ultimate liberation.


Manu continued:--Now the living liberated yogi, in whatever manner
he is clad, and however well or ill fed he may be, and wherever he
may sleep or lay down his humble head, he rests with the joy of his
mind, and in a state of perfect ease and blissfulness, as if he were
the greatest emperor of the world. (Hence the fakirs are called _shah
sahibs_ by people).

2. He breaks down all the bonds of his caste and creed, and the rites
and restraints of his order by the battery of the sástra; and roves
freed from the snare of society, as a lion breaking loose from his
cage, and roaming rampant every where. (Here the sástra means the
upanishads on the esoteric faith of spiritual freedom).

3. He has his mind abstracted from all sensible objects, and fixed on
an object which no words can express (_i.e._ the unspeakable rapture of
his mind); and he shines forth with a grace in his face, resembling the
clearness of an autumnal sky.

4. He is always as deep and clear (_i.e._ grave in his mind and clear
headed), as a large lake in a valley; and being rapt in holy and
heavenly joy, he is always cheerful in himself, without his care for or
want of anything else.

5. He is ever content in his mind without having anything for his
dependance, or any expectation of the reward of his actions; and is
neither addicted to any meritorious or unworthy acts, nor subject to
joy or grief for aught of pleasure or pain.

6. As a piece of crystal does not receive or emit any other colour
in its reflexion, excepting that of its pure whiteness; so the
spiritualist is not imbued with the tinge of the effects of his
actions. (_i.e._ The spiritualist does not benefit by the retribution
of his acts).

7. He remains indifferent in human society, and is not affected either
by the torture or subministration of his body; he deems his pain
and pleasure as passing on his shadow, and never takes them to his
heart, as they do not touch his intangible soul. (It was by virtue of
this indifference, that the holy saints did not shrink under their
persecutions and martyrdom).

8. Whether honoured or slighted by men, he neither praises nor
is displeased with them; and remains himself either connected or
unconnected with the customs and rules of society.

9. He hurts no body, nor is hurt by any; and may be free from the
feelings of anger or affection, fear and joy (and other passions which
are allotted to humanity).

10. No one can have the greatness of mind of his own nature, but it is
possible for the author of nature, to raise the greatness of mind even
in a boy.

11. Whether a man quits his body (dies) in a holy place, or in the
house of a low chandála; or whether one dies at this moment (in youth),
or many years afterwards (in old age).

12. He is released from his bondage to life, no sooner he comes to his
knowledge of the soul and gets rid of his desires; because the error of
his egoism is the cause of his bondage, and the wasting of it by his
knowledge, is the means of his liberation.

13. He the living liberated man is to be honoured and praised, and to
be bowed down to with veneration, and regarded with every attention, by
every one who is desirous of his prosperity and elevation. (Because we
honour ourselves by honouring the great).

14. No religious sacrifice nor wilful austerity, no charity nor
pilgrimage, can lead us to that supremely holy state of human dignity;
which is attainable by us only by our respectful attendance upon the
godly, who have got rid of the troubles of the world. (Hence attendance
on saints and at their holy shrines, is accounted as productive of our
sanctity).

15. Vasishtha said:--The venerable sage Manu, having spoken in this
manner, departed to the celestial abode of his sire Brahmá; and Ikshaku
continued to act according to the precepts, which were delivered to him
by the sacred seer.




