CHAPTER LXXXXVII.

ENLIGHTENMENT OF THE PRINCE IN THEOSOPHY.

Argument:--Effacing the impression of visibles from the mind continued.


Kumbha continued:--Know that nothing is produced from, nor destroyed by
the ever tranquil spirit of God at any time; but everything appears as
the panorama of the one all (_topan_) God; like the various kinds of
ornaments made of the same metal of gold.

2. Brahma remains forever in his own essence, and never becomes the
seed or cause of any other thing; he is ever of the form of our innate
conception of him, and therefore never becomes any other than our
simple idea of him.

3. Sikhidhwaja said:--I grant, Oh sagely monitor, that there subsists
no separate world nor any other egoism in the one pure Siva (Zeus
or Jove), except his own essence of omniscience; but please to tell
me, what thing is this world and individual egoisms that seem to be
infinite in number, and appear as distinct creations of God?

4. Kumbha replied:--The essence of God is without its beginning and
end, and extends to infinite space and time.

5. The same also is this transparent cosmos, and the very same is
the body of this world; which is simple and of the form of divine
intelligence, and neither a void nor any extraneous thing.

6. The essential property of God being his intelligence, he is said to
be of essence of intellect; and as fluidity is the property of water,
so is intelligence the essential property of everything; and there is
no reason to suppose an unintelligent principle as the prime cause of
all.

7. The Lord is infinite in himself and is so situated in his infinitude
for ever, without the grossness of the infinitesimals ever attaching to
their pure intelligence in the subjective soul.

8. We cannot attribute the creation of the impure world, to the pure
essence of the divine spirit; because the purity of the divine soul,
cannot admit the impurity of creation, which would amount to a duality
of purity and impurity in the supreme soul: (which is altogether absurd
to believe).

9. The Lord can never be supposed as the seed or cause of the universe,
since his nature is inscrutable and beyond our conception, and cannot
be thought of as the root of anything whatever.

10. Therefore there is no creation or production of an effect, without
its cause or seed; nor does reason point out to us, any other source of
creation.

11. Therefore there is no gross creation whatsoever, except of the form
of the intellect itself; and hence all that is visible to us, is no
other than the solid intellect itself.

12. The feeling of egoism and the term world, are meaningless words
and mere inventions of men; because nothing whatever can be called an
effect or product, which has no cause assigned to it.

13. The duality of the world appears in the unity of God, in the same
manner as a flower called the sky flower appears in the hollow vacuum
of the sky (by mere delusion). And all things being perishable in their
nature, exist only in the intellect in which they live and die. (If the
world be of the solid intellect, then the very intellect becomes the
cause of the same, by means of the solidification of its own substance;
but it is not so, because it is impossible for the same thing to be
both the cause and effect of something by itself).

14. Destruction is not the giver of life to destruction, nor is it a
giver of life to perishable things; hence intellect is the giver of
light to all: but you may call whatever you like the best.

15. What difficulty you have, provided all things are to be called one,
when all have come from the intellect; the duality what you call, that
is the mystery of intellect-chit only.

16. The intellect therefore is the only true entity, which admits no
unity nor duality in it. And therefore, O prince, you must know the
nullity of all other entities beside it.

17. The feeling of thy egoism, is as false as thy conception of any
other thing; and thus the idea of egoism proving to be false, what else
can there be except the only entity of the intellect.

18. Thus egoism (being) no other than a form of the intellect, there is
no difference whatever between them; hence the words I, thou &c. are
mere human inventions to distinguish one from another (when there is in
reality no difference in the personality of any body).

19. Whether you remain in your embodied or disembodied state, continue
to remain always as firm as a rock; by knowing yourself only as the
pure intellect, and the nullity of all things besides.

20. By thinking yourself always as the intellect, you will lose the
sense of your egoism and personality; and so will your reflexion on the
contexts of the texts of the vedas, lead you to the same conclusion.
(There are numerous texts to the effect that God is the only entity,
and this all is naught but God).

21. From all these know thyself as the pure essence, which is uncaused
and unmade, and the same with the first and original principle; that
thou art same with the emancipate and everlasting Brahma, and multiform
in thy unity; that thou art as void as vacuity, having neither thy
beginning, middle or end; and that this world is the intellect and that
intellect is the very Brahma himself.




