CHAPTER IX.

ASCERTAINMENT OF TRUE KNOWLEDGE.

Argument.--Division of the three _gunas_ or qualities. Pure essence of
the Gods Hara and others, nature of knowledge and ignorance, and other
subjects.


Ráma said, You said sir, that all formal bodies are representations of
illusion or ignorance (Avidyá); but how do you account for the pure
bodies of Hari, Hara and other divinities, and god-heads who are of
pure essence in their embodied forms, and which cannot be the creation
of our error or delusion. Please, sir, explain these clearly to (spun)
me and remove my doubts and difficulties on the subject (The exhibition
of gross bodies is the deception of our sense, but the appearance of
pure spiritual forms, can not be production of ignorance or sensible
deception. We may ignore the forms of material substances, but not
those immaterial essences which are given in the sástras. gloss).

2. Vasishtha replied,--The perceptible world represents the
manifestation of the one quiescent and all inherent soul, and exhibits
the glory (_ábhásha_) of the essential intellect (_sach-chit_), which
is beyond conception or thought divine.

3. This gives rise to the shape of a partial hypostasis, or there
rises of itself hypostatics ([Sanskrit: kalákalarúpiní]), resembling
the rolling fragment of a cloud appearing as a watery substance or
filled with water. (This original fiction of the glory of God giving
rise to the watery mist like a lighted lamp emitting the inky smoke,
is represented in the common belief of dark ignorance ([Sanskrit:
avidyá]) proceeding from the bright light of divine knowledge
([Sanskrit: vidyá]), and exhibited by the allegory of the black goddess
of ignorance and illusion ([Sanskrit: avidyá] and [Sanskrit: máyá])
gushing out of the white and fair god lying inactive and dormant under
her; she is hence designated by the various epithets of ([Sanskrit:
shyámá, kálí, jaladha] and [Sanskrit: níradavaraná]) and so forth, and
this is the whole mystery of the Sákta faith).

4. This hypostatic fragment is also conceived in its three different
lights or phases, of rarity, density and rigidity or grossness,
([Sanskrit: sukhsmá; madhyá, sthúlá]) resembling the twilight, midday
light, and darkness of the solar light. The first of these is called
the mind or creative will, the second styled the Brahmá Hiranyagarbha
or the creative power, and the third is known as Virát, the framer of
the material frame, and as identic with creation itself.

5. These are again denominated the three qualities (trigunas),
according to their different states, and these are the qualities of
reality, brightness and darkness _satva_, _rajas_ and _tamas_, which
are designated also as the triple nature of things or their _swabhávas_
or _prakriti_.

6. Know all nature to be characterised by ignorance of the triple
states of the _positive and comparative and superlative degrees_; these
_are inbred in all living_ beings, except the Being that is beyond
them, and which is the supreme one.

7. Again the three qualities of _satva_, _rajas_, and _tamas_ or the
positive, comparative and superlative, which are mentioned in this
place, have each of them its subdivisions also into three kinds of the
same name.

8. Thus the original Ignorance ([Sanskrit: avidyá]), becomes of nine
kinds by difference of its several qualities; and whatever is seen
or known here below, is included under one or of the various kinds.
(Hence the saktas reckon ten different forms of [Sanskrit: mahávidyá],
comprising the primary ignorance and its nine fold divisions).

9. Now Ráma, know the positive or satwika quality of ignorance, to
comprise the several classes of living beings known as the Rishis,
Munis, the Siddhas and Nágas, the Vidyádharas and Suras. (All of these
are marked by the positive quality of goodness inborn in their nature).

10. Again this quality of positive goodness comprises the Suras or gods
Hara and others of the first class that are purely and truly good. The
sages and Siddhas forming the second or intermediate class, are endued
with a less share of goodness in them, while Nágas or Vidyádharas
making the last class possess it in the least degree.

11. The gods being born with the pure essence of goodness, and
remaining unmixed with the properties of other natures, have attained
the state of purity (Holiness) like the divine Hari Hara and others.
(_i.e._ So long the divine nature of a god is not shrouded under the
veil of ignorance (avidyá _ávarana_), he is to be held in the light
of a divinity as a Christ or Buddha); otherwise rajasha or qualified
states of Hari Hara as they are represented by the vulgar, are neither
to be regarded as such.

12. Ráma! whoever is fraught with the quality of goodness in his
nature, and acquainted with divine knowledge in his mind, such a
one is said to be liberated in this life, and freed from further
transmigration.

13. It is for this reason, O high minded Ráma! that the gods Rudra and
others who possess the properties of goodness in them, are said to
continue in their liberated state to the final end of the world.

(Hence the immortals never die and being released from their earthly
coil, their good spirits rove at large in open air; last and until the
last doomsday rorqucamat or final resurrection of the dead).

14. Great souls remain liberated, as long as they continue to live in
their mortal bodies; and after the shuffling of their frail bodies,
they become free as their disembodied spirits; and then reside in the
supreme spirit. (_i.e._ They return to the source from which they had
proceeded).

15. It is the part of ignorance to lead men to the performance of
acts, which after their death, become the roots of producing other
acts also in all successive states of transmigration. (Ignorance leads
one to interminable action in repeated births, by making the acts of
the prior life to become the source of others in the next, so the acts
of ignorance, become the seeds and fruits of themselves by turns, and
there is no cessation nor liberation from them).

16. Ignorance rises from knowledge, as the hollow bubble bursts out
of the level of liquid water; and it sets and sinks in knowledge
likewise, as the bubble subsides to rest in the same water. (Ignorance
and its action which are causes of creation, have both their rise
from the omniscience and inaction of God until they are dissolved
at the dissolution of the world. Physical force rises from and
rests in the spiritual. Ignorance--_avidyá_ being but a negation of
knowledge--vidyá, is said to proceed from:--the negative being but
privation of the positive).

17. And as there is no such thing as a wave; but a word coined to
denote the heaving of water; so there is nothing as ignorance but a
word fabricated to express the want of knowledge. (Hence the believers
in ignorance are mistaken in relying their faith in a power which has
no existence whatever).

18. As the water and waves are identic in their true sense, and there
is no material difference between them; so both knowledge and ignorance
relating to the same thing, and expressing either its presence or
absence, there can be no essential difference in their significance.

19. Leaving aside the sights of knowledge and ignorance, there remains
that which always exists of itself (that is, the self-existent God
exists, beyond both the knowledge and ignorance of men, or whether
they know him or not). It is only the contradiction of adverse parties
([Sanskrit: pratiyogi byavaccheda]) that has introduced these words.
(_i.e._, calling the opponents as ignorant and themselves as the
knowing, in their mutual altercation with one another).

20. The sights of knowledge and ignorance are nothing; (_i.e._, they
are both blind to the sight of truth): therefore be firm in what is
beyond these, and which can neither be known nor ignored by imagination
of it.

21. There is some thing which is not any thing, except that it exists
in the manner of the intellect and consciousness _chit-samvit_, and
this again has no representation of it, and therefore that ens or sat
is said to be inevident avidyá the unknowable.

22. That One Sat being known as this or such, is said to be the
destroyer of ignorance; whereas it is want of this knowledge, that
gives rise to the false conception of an _Avidyá_ or ignorance.
(Avidyá, mithyá, kalpaná signifies ignorance to be a false imagination
and personification also, as it is seen in the images of the ten
Avidyás here).

23. When knowledge and ignorance are both lost in oblivion within one
in the intellect as when both the sun-shine and its shadow are lost in
shade of night. (_i.e._, both the knowledge of the subjective _ego_ and
objective _non-ego_ which is caused by ignorance being concentrated in
the consciousness of the intellect only within one's self).

24. Then there remains the one only that is to be gained and known,
and thus it is, that the loss of ignorance tends to the dissipation
of self-knowledge likewise (which is caused by it); just as the want
of oil extinguishes the lamp. (Egoism and ignorance being akin to one
another, both of them rise and remain and die together [Sanskrit:
ajnánahámkarayoreko satitayorút pattináshau yúgavadeba]).

25. That what remains afterwards, is either nullity or the whole
plenum, in which all these things appear to subsist, or it is nothing
at all. (The one is the view of atheists who deny all existence, and
the other of máyikas who maintain the visible nature as mere illusion.
([Sanskrit: máyámayamidamakhilam])).

26. As the minute grain of the Indian fig-tree contains within it
the future arbor and its undeveloped state, so the almighty power of
omnipotence is lodged in the minute receptacle of the spirit before its
expansion into immensity. (The developed and undeveloped states of the
supreme power, are called its vyákrita and avyákrita forces).

27. The divine spirit is more rarefied than the subtile air, and yet
is not a vacuity having the chit or intellect in itself. It is as the
sun-stone with its inherent fire and the milk with the latent butter
unborn in it. (Hence the spirit of God is said to be embryonic seed of
the universe. [Sanskrit: brahmándavíjam]).

28. All space and time reside in that spirit for their development, as
the spark proceeds from the fire and light issues from the sun in which
they are contained. (The will or word of God produces all things from
his spiritual essence).

29. So all things are settled in the Supreme intellect, and show
themselves unto us as the waves of the sea and as the radiance of gems:
and so our understandings also are reflexions of the same.

30. The Divine intellect is the store-house of all things, and the
reservoir of all consciousness (_i.e._, the fountain-head of the
understandings of all living beings). It is the Divine essence which
pervades the inside and outside of every thing. (All things are
dependent to the entity of God for their existence, and there is no
independent particle whatever).

31. The Divine soul is as imperishable as the air within a pot which
is not destroyed by breaking of the vessel, but mixes and continues
forever with the common and its surrounding air. Know also the lives
and actions of living beings to be dependent upon the will of the
God, as the mobility of the iron depends upon the attraction of the
loadstone. (This passage negatives the free agency of man, and allows
him an activity in common with that of all living beings, under the
direction of the great magnet of the Divine spirit and will).

32. The action of the inactive or quiescent spirit of God, is to be
understood in the same manner, as the motion of the lead is attributed
to the causality of magnetic attraction, which moves the immovable
iron. So the inert bodies of living beings, are moved by force of the
intellectual soul.

33. The world is situated in that mundane seed of the universe, which
is known under the name of intellect attributed to it by the wise. It
is as void and formless as empty air, it is nothing nor has any thing
in it except itself, and represents all and everything by itself, like
the playful waves of the boundless ocean.




