CHAPTER IV.

Argument.--Vasishtha exposes the evils of selfish views
_parág-drishti_, and exalts the merit of elevated views
_pratyag-drishti_.


Vasishtha continued:--Ráma! knowing your mind, understanding, egoism
and all your senses, to be insensible of themselves, and deriving their
sensibility from the intellect; say how can your living soul and the
vital breaths, have any sensation of their own.

2. It is the one great soul, that infuses its power to those different
organs; as the one bright sun dispenses his light, to all the various
objects in their diverse colours.

3. As the pangs of the poisonous thirst after worldly enjoyments, come
to an end; so the insensibility of ignorance, flies away like darkness
at the end of the night.

4. It is the incantation of spiritual knowledge only, that is able to
heal the pain of baneful avarice; as it is in the power of autumn only,
to dispel the clouds of the rainy-season.

5. It is the dissipation of ignorance, which washes the mind of its
attendant desires; as it is the disappearance of the rainy weather,
which scatters the clouds in the sky.

6. The mind being weakened to unmindfulness, loses the chain of its
desires from it; as a necklace of pearls being loosened from its broken
string, tosses the precious gems all about the ground.

7. Ráma! they that are unmindful of the sástras, and mind to undermine
them; resemble the worms and insects, that mine the ground wherein they
remain.

8. The fickle eye-sight of the idle and curious gazer on all things,
becomes motionless after their ignorant curiosity is over and has
ceased to stir; as the shaking lotus of the lake becomes steady, after
the gusts of wind have passed away and stopped.

9. You have got rid, O Ráma! of your thought of all entities and
non-entities, and found your steadiness in the ever-steady unity of
God; as the restless winds mix at last with the calm vacuum (after
their blowing and breathing over the solid earth, and in the hollow
sky).

10. I ween you have been awakened to sense, by these series of my
sermons to you; as kings are awakened from their nightly sleep, by the
sound of their eulogists and the music of timbrels.

11. Seeing that common people of low understandings, are impressed by
the preachings of their parish parsons; I have every reason to believe
that my sermons must make their impression, upon the good understanding
of Ráma.

12. As you are in the habit of considering well, the good counsel of
others in your mind; so I doubt not, that my counsel will penetrate
your mind, as the cool rain-water enters into the parched ground of the
earth.

13. Knowing me as your family priest, and my family as the spiritual
guides of Raghus race for ever; you must receive with regard my good
advices to you, and set my words as a neck-chain to your heart.




CHAPTER V.

Argument.--Ráma's relation to Vasishtha, of his perfect rest in
godliness.


Ráma said:--O my venerable guide! My retrospection of your sermons, has
set my mind to perfect rest, and I see the traps and turmoils of this
world before me, with a quite indifferent and phlegmatic mind.

2. My soul has found its perfect tranquillity in the Supreme Spirit, is
as the parched ground is cooled by a snow or of rainfall after a long
and painful drought.

3. I am as cool as coldness itself, and feel the felicity of an entire
unity in myself; and my mind has become as tranquil and transparent, as
the limpid lake that is undisturbed by elephants.

4. I see the whole plenum of the universe, O sage! in its pristine pure
light; and as clear as the face of the wide extended firmament, without
the dimness of frost or mist.

5. I am now freed from my doubts, and exempted from the mirage of the
world; I am equally aloof from affections, and have become as pure and
serene, as the lake and sky in autumn.

6. I have found that transport in my inmost soul, which knows no bound
nor decay; and have the enjoyment of that _gusto_, which defies the
taste of the ambrosial draught of gods.

7. I am now set in the truth of actual existence, and my repose in the
joyous rest of my soul. I have become the delight of mankind and my own
joy in myself, which makes me thank my felicitous self, and you also
for giving me this blessing. (The Sruti says, Heavenly bliss is the
delight of men, and the heartfelt joy of every body).

8. My heart has become as expanded and pure, as the expanse of limpid
lakes in autumn; and my mind hath become as cold and serene, as the
clear and humid sky in the season of autumn.

9. Those doubts and coinings of imagination, which mislead the blind,
have now fled afar from me; as the fear of ghosts appearing in the
dark, disappear at the light of day-break.

10. How can there be the speck or spot of impurity, in the pure and
enlightened soul; and how can the doubts of the objective nature,
arise in the subjective mind? All these errors vanish to naught, like
darkness before moon light.

11. All these appearances appearing in various forms, are but the
diverse manifestations of the self-same soul; it is therefore a fallacy
to suppose, this is one thing and that another, by our misjudgment of
them.

12. I smile to think in myself, the miserable slave of my desires that
I had been before; that am now so well satisfied without them. (The
privation of desire gives greater satisfaction than its fulfilment).

13. I remember now how my single and solitary self, is one and all with
the universal soul of the world; since I received my baptism with the
ambrosial fluid of thy words.

14. O the highest and holiest station, which I have now attained to;
and from where I behold the sphere of the sun, to be situated as low as
the infernal region.

15. I have arrived at the world of sober reality and existence, from
that of unreality and seeming existence. I therefore thank my soul,
that has became so elevated and adorable with its fulness of the Deity.

16. O venerable Sage:--I am now situated in everlasting joy, and far
removed from the region of sorrow; by the sweet sound of the honeyed
words, which have crept like humming bees, into the pericarp of my
lotus-like heart.




