CHAPTER CXVI.

MELTING DOWN OF THE MIND.

Argument.--The Dissolation of the Mind and its Affections, as the only
way for salvation of the soul.


Ráma said:--O all-knowing sage please to tell me, what becomes of the
essence of the soul after one's egoism is lost in his mind, and both of
them are dissolved into nothing.

2. Vasishtha replied:--However great and predominant is one's egoism
over himself, and how much so ever its concomitant evils of pride and
ignorance, may overpower on man; yet they can never touch the pure
essence of the soul, as the water of the lake can not come in contact
with the lotus-leaf.

3. The purity of the soul appears vividly in the bright and placid
countenance of a man, after his egoism and its accompanying faults are
all melted down in his mortified mind.

4. All the ties of our passions and affections are cut asunder and
fall off, upon breaking the string of our desires, our anger becomes
weakened, and our ignorance wears out by degrees (our desire or
greediness being the root of all evils).

5. Our cupidity is weakened and wearied, and our covetousness flies
away far from us; our limbs become slackened, and our sorrows subside
to rest.

6. It is then that our afflictions fail to afflict as our joys cease to
elate us; we have then a calm every where and a coldness in our heart.

7. Joy and grief now and then overcast his countenance, (as a cloud
and sunbeam hide the face of the sky); but they cannot over shadow his
soul, which is bright as eternal day.

8. The virtuous man becomes a favourite of the Gods, after his mind is
melted down with its passions; and then there rises the calm evenness
of his soul, resembling the cooling beams of the moon.

9. He bears a calm and quiet disposition, offending and opposing to
none, and therefore loved and honored by everyone; he remains retired
and assiduous to his task, and enjoys the serenity of his soul at all
times.

10. Neither wealth nor poverty, nor prosperity or adversity, however
opposite they are to one another; can ever affect or mislead or elate
or depress the minds of the virtuous (who have already melted them down
in themselves).

11. Accursed is the man that is drowned in his ignorance, and does not
seek the salvation of his soul, which is easily obtainable by the light
of reason, and which serves to save him from all the difficulties of
this world. (Reliance in the immortality of the soul, supports a man
amidst all earthly calamities).

12. He that wants to obtain his longed for felicity, by getting over
the waves of his miserable transmigrations in the vast ocean of this
world; must always inquire in himself as what am I, and what is this
world and what am I to be afterwards; what means this short lived
enjoyments here, and what are the fruitions of my future state. These
inquiries are the best expedients towards the salvation of the soul.




CHAPTER CXVII.

DIALOGUE BETWEEN MANU AND IKSHAKU.

Argument:--Manu's Exposition of the Inquiries what am I &c. to Ikshaku.


Vasishtha said:--Know Ráma, that the renowned king Ikshaku was the
first founder of your race; and learn O thou progeny of that monarch,
the manner in which he obtained his liberation.

2. Once on a time when this monarch was reigning over his kingdom, he
came to think upon the state of humanity in one of his solitary hours.

3. He thought in himself as to, what might be the cause of the decay,
disease, and death, as also of the sorrow, pleasure and pain, and
likewise of the errors to which all living beings are subject in this
mortal world.

4. He pondered long upon these thoughts, but was unable to find out
the cause he so earnestly sought, and happening to meet the sage Manu
one day, coming to him from Brahmá-loka or the seat of Bráhmans, he
proposed the same queries to him.

5. Having honoured the lord of creatures, as he took his seat in his
court; he said to him to be excused for asking him some questions to
which he was impelled by his impatience.

6. It is by thy favour sir, that I take the liberty of asking thee the
question, regarding the origin of this creation, and the original state
in which it was made.

7. Tell me, what is the number of these worlds, and who is the master
and owner thereof; and when and by whom is it said to be created in the
vedas.

8. Tell me, how I may be extricated from my doubts and erroneous
opinions regarding this creation, and how I may be released from them
like a bird from its net.

9. Manu replied:--I see O king, that you have after a long time come
to exercise of your reasoning, as it is shown by your proposing to me
so important a question as this.

10. All this that you see nothing real (they are merely phenomenal and
unsubstantial); they resemble the fairy castles in the air, and the
water in the mirage of sandy deserts. So also anything which is not
seen in reality, is accounted nothing in existence.

11. The mind also which lies beyond the six senses, is reckoned as
nothing in reality; but that which is indestructible, is the only thing
that is said to exist, and is called the _Tatsat_ the only being in
reality.

12. All these visible worlds and successive creations, are but
unsubstantial appearances in the mirror of that real substance.

13. The inherent powers of Brahma, evolve themselves as shining sparks
of fire; and some of these assume the forms of the luminous worlds;
while others appear in the shapes of living souls.

14. Others again take many other forms, which compose this universe;
and there is nothing as bondage or liberation here, except that the
undecaying Brahma is all in all; nor is there any unity or duality in
nature, except the diversity displayed by the Divine Mind, from the
essence of his own consciousness (samvid).

15. As it is the same water of the sea, which itself is in the various
forms of its waves; so doth the Divine Intellect display itself in
every thing, and there is nothing else beside this. Therefore leave
aside your thoughts of bondage and liberation and rest, secure in this
belief from the fears of the world. (This is pantheistic belief of one
God in all).




