CHAPTER XXXXIII.

ON REST AND TRANQUILLITY.

Argument.--Ráma admits before Vasishtha the removal of his doubt in
dualistic doctrine.


Vasishtha said:--I well understand what the god said, and you too, O
Ráma! know very well the course of the world.

2. When the false world appears in a false light to the fallacious
understanding of man, and all proves to be but vanity of vanities, say
what thing is there that may be called true and good and what as untrue
and bad. (There is nothing what ever which is really good).

3. As the alternative of something is not that thing itself, so the
optional form of the soul, though not the soul itself, yet it serves to
convey some idea of the soul. (As the explanation of the gloss is;--The
similitude of a thing though not the thing itself, yet it gives some
idea of the original).

4. As fluidity is the nature of liquids, and fluctuation is that of
the winds, and as vacuity is the state of the sky, so is creation the
condition of the spirit or divine soul.

5. I have ever since (hearing the lecture of Sivá), betaken myself to
the worship of the spirit in spirit; and have since then, given up my
eagerness for the outward adoration of gods.

6. It is by this rule that I have passed these days of my life, though
I am tamely employed in the observance of the prescribed and popular
ritual.

7. I have worshipped the Divine spirit, in all modes and forms and
offering of flowers, as they presented of themselves to me; and
notwithstanding the interruptions, I have uninterruptedly adored my god
at all times, both by day and night.

8. All people in general, are concerned in making their offerings
acceptable to their receiver (god), but it is the meditation of the
yogi, which is the true adoration of the spirit.

9. Having known this, O lord of Raghu's race, do you abandon the
society of men in your heart, and walk in your lonely path amidst the
wilderness of the world, and thereby remain without sorrow and remorse.

10. And when exposed or reduced to distress, or aggrieved at the loss
or separation of friends, rely on this truth, and think on the vanity
of the world.

11. We should neither rejoice nor regret, at the acquisition or loss
of friends and relations; because all things almost are so frail and
unstable, in this transitory world.

12. You well know, Ráma! the precarious state of worldly possessions
and their pernicious effects also; they come and go away of their own
accord, but overpower on the man in both states (of prosperity and
adversity).

13. So uncertain are the favours of friends and fortune, and so
unforeseen is their loss also, that it is no way possible for any body
to account for them. (_i.e._ to assign any plausible cause to either).

14. O sinless Ráma! such is the course of the world, that you have
no command over it nor is it ever subject to you; if the world is so
insubordinate to you, why is it then that you should be sorry for so
unmanageable a thing?

15. Ráma! mind your spiritual nature, and know yourself as an expanded
form of your intellect. See how you are pent up in your earthly frame,
and forsake your joy and grief at the repeated reiterations and exits
of your corporeal body.

16. Know my boy, that you are of the form of your intellect only, and
inherent throughout all nature; therefore there is nothing that you can
resume to or reject from you in the world.

17. What cause of joy or grief is there in the vicissitudes of things
in the world, which are occasioned by the revolutions of the mind on
the pivot of the intellect; and resemble the whirling waters of the
sea, caused by an eddy or vortex in it.

18. Do you, O Ráma! betake yourself to the fourth stage of _susupta_
or hypnotism hence forth, as the even tenor of the intellect, is
attended by its trance at the end.

19. Be you as cold and composed with your placid countenance and
expanded mind, as the quiet spirit of God is diffused and displayed
through out all nature; and remains as full as the vast ocean, in the
contemplation of that soul, whose fulness fills the whole.

20. You have heard all this already, Ráma! and are fraught with the
fulness of your understanding, now if you have any thing else to ask
with regard to your former question, you can propose the same. (This
was a question regarding the observance of ceremonial rites).

21. Ráma said:--Sir, my former doubts are all dispersed at present, and
I have nothing more to ask you regarding the same (_i.e._ the dualistic
doctrine that raised the doubts).

22. I have known all that is to be known, and felt a heartfelt
satisfaction at this, and now I am free from the foulness of the
objective, and of dualism and fictions. (Knowledge of the objective
being unspiritual, the dualism of matter and mind as unscriptual, and
the fictions of the gods etc., as mere vagaries of imagination).

23. The foulness of the soul, proceeds from ignorance of the soul; and
this ignorance (of the subjective self), which had darkened my soul, is
now removed by the light of spirituality.

24. I was under the error (of the mortality and materiality of the
soul), which I have now come to understand, is neither foul matter, nor
is it born or dies at any time. (_i.e._ It is immaterial, unproduced
and immortal).

25. I am now confirmed in my belief, that all this is Brahmá diffused
through out nature (in his all pervasive form _vivartarúpá_); and I
have ceased from all doubts and questions on the subject, nor have I
the desire of knowing any thing more about it. (He desires to know
nothing, who beholds the lord in every thing).

26. My mind is now as pure, as the purified water of filtering
machine; and am no more in need of learning any thing, from the
preachings and moral lessons of the wise.

27. I am unconcerned with all worldly affairs, as the mount Sumeru is
insensible of the golden ores in its bosom and having all things about
me, I am quite indifferent to them; because I have not what I expect to
have, nor do I possess the object of my fond desire.

28. I expect nothing that is desirable, nor reject any thing which is
exceptionable; nor is there a mean in the interim of the two in this
world, because there is nothing that is really acceptable or avoidable
in it, nor anything which is truly good or bad herein.

29. Thus, O sage, the erroneous thought of these contraries, is
entirely dissipated from me; wherefore I neither care for a seat in
heaven, nor fear the terrors of the infernal regions.

30. I am as fixed in the selfsame spirit, as the mount Mandárá is
firmly seated amidst the sea, and which scatters its particles
throughout the three worlds, as that mountain splashed the particles of
water in its state of churning the ocean.

31. I am as firm as the fixed Mandárá, while others are wandering in
their errors of discriminating the positive and negative and the true
and false, in their wrong estimation.

32. The heart of that man must be entangled with the weeds of doubts,
who thinks in his mind the world to be one thing, and the Divine spirit
as another. (This duality is the root of doubts in the one ultimate
unity).

33. He that seeks for his real good in any thing in this world, never
finds the same in the unsubstantial material world, which is full of
the confused waves of the eternity.

34. It is by your favour, O venerable sir, that I have got over the
boisterous ocean of this world; and having the limits of its perilous
coasts, have come to the shore of safety and found the path of my
future prosperity.

35. I am no more wanting in that supreme felicity, which is the summum
bonum of all things; and am full in myself as the lord of all. And I am
quite indomitable by any body, since I have defeated the wild elephant
of my covetousness.

36. Being loosened from the chain of desire, and freed from the fetters
of option, I am rich and blest with the best of all things, and this
is the internal satisfaction of my soul and mind, which gives me a
cheerful appearance in all the triple world.




