CHAPTER LXXXXV.

THE _anaesthetic_ PLATONISM OF SIKHIDHWAJA.

Argument:--Dispersion of the gloom of ignorance from the mind of
Sikhidhwaja. His coming to the Light of Truth and the Tranquillity of
his soul.


Sikhidhwaja said:--If the view of the whole universe is but a phantom,
and our knowledge of myself, thyself and of this and that, is but an
error of our mind, then why is it that we should be concerned about or
sorry for anything.

2. Kumbha replied:--The erroneous impression of the existence of the
world, has so firmly laid hold of the minds of men; as the frozen water
appearing as crystal, is believed as dry land by people.

3. It is said by the learned, that the knowledge of gross matter is
lost with the dispersion of ignorance; and that there is no other way
of getting rid of this long contracted prejudice, without our riddance
from ignorance.

4. It is the acuteness of the understanding, which is the only means of
our coming to the knowledge of truth; that the creation and dissolution
of the world, are dependant on the will and causality of the supreme
Being.

5. He whose understanding becomes, is sure to lose his rooted prejudice
by degrees; and come to the knowledge of the nihility of the material
world.

6. In this way of refining your mind from its prepossession of gross
ideas, you will come to find the erroneous conception of a prime male
(ádipurusha), as that of Brahmá (or Adam) as the first creative power,
to be as false as the water in the mirage.

7. The great grandfather of the world being a nullity, the creation
of all creatures by him (who is thence called _Prajápatih_ or lord
of creatures); is likewise as false and null, as it is absurd for an
impossibility to come into being.

8. The perception of a thing _in esse_, is as false as the conception
of water in the mirage; a little reflexion is enough to remove this
error, like the mistake of silver in cockles and conch-shells.

9. Any work which appears to exist without its cause, is only a phantom
of fallacy, and has no essential form whatever in reality.

10. Whatever is done by one's erroneous knowledge or mistake of a
thing, comes to be of no use to him; as the attempt to fill a pot with
the water of the mirage, proves to be utterly vain.

11. Sikhidhwaja said:--Why can't we call the supreme Brahma, to be
the cause of Brahmá--the first creator of the world who is called the
son of God, the one unborn and without end, and the inexpressible and
everlasting.

12. Kumbha replied:--The God Brahma, being neither the cause nor the
effect of any action, is but an invariable unity and transcendent
spirit, and is never the cause or effect of anything.

13. How can the incomprehensible and unknowable Brahma, be designated
as the creator, when he is not predicable by any of the predicates of
the creator or created or as the instrument or cause of anything.

14. The world having no separate cause, is no separate product of any
causality whatever; it is no duality but one with the unity, without
its beginning or end, and co-eternal with the eternal one. (_To
pan_--God is all in all).

15. He that is inconceivable and unknowable, is perfect felicity,
tranquillity and ever undecaying, and can never be the active or
passive agent of anything, on account of the immutability of his nature.

16. Hence there is nothing as a creation, and the visible world is but
a nihility, and the Lord God is neither an active nor passive agent,
but quite still and full of bliss.

17. There being no causal power, the world is not the production of any
body; it is our error only that this world as a production without any
assignable cause.

18. The uncaused world is the product of nothing, and therefore nothing
in itself; for if it be the production of nobody, it is a nullity like
its cause also.

19. The non-existence of anything or the not being of everything
(except that of the supreme Being), being proved as a certain truth; we
can have no conception of anything, and the absence of such conception,
it is in vain to suppose the existence of an egoism or tuism.

20. Sikhidhwaja said:--Sir, I now perceive the truth, and find the
reasonableness of all that you have said; I see now that I am the pure
and free soul, and quite aloof of any bondage or its liberation from
bonds.

21. I understand Brahma as no cause of anything, for his entire want
of causality; and the world is a nullity for its want of a cause, and
therefore there is no being whatever which we reckon as a category.

22. Thence there is no such category as the mind or its seed, nor its
growth nor decay; I therefore bow down to myself of which alone I have
a consciousness in me.

23. I am alone conscious of myself, existence in myself and have
no real knowledge of any thing else beside me, and which appear as
fleeting clouds in the womb of the sky.

24. The distinct knowledge of the different categories of time, place,
action in the world, is now entirely blended in the knowledge of the
unity of the tranquil spirit of Brahma (which composes all varieties in
itself).

25. I am tranquil, calm and quiet and settled in the spirit of God; I
do not rise nor fall from nor move about this prop. I remain as you do
in immovable spirit of God, which is all quiet, holiness and felicity
in itself.




