CHAPTER XVI.

CONVERSATION OF VASISHTHA AND BHUSUNDA.

Argument.--Reception of Vasishtha by Bhusunda, and the Inquiries of the
sage regarding the life and acts of the crow.


Vasishtha Continued:--I then alighted before the veteran crow with my
brilliant etherial body, as a bright meteor falling from the sky on the
top of a mountain; and this my sudden appearance startled the assembly,
as if they were disturbed by my intrusion.

2. The assembly of the black birds trembled like the lotuses of the
lake, at the shaking of the gentle breeze; and the agitation of the air
at my slow descent, troubles them as much as an earthquake troubles the
waters of the deep.

3. But Bhusunda who was a seer of the three times, was not at all
disturbed at my arrival; but know me as Vasishtha, now in attendance
upon him. (Like a flimsy cloud from the mount).

4. He then rose from his leafy seat, and advancing slowly before me, he
said with sweet sounds distilling as honey. I welcome thee great sage
to my humble cell.

5. Then he stretched both hands to me, holding clusters of flowers
that he had at his will and then strewed them in hand-fulls upon me,
as a cloud scatters the dewdrops over the ground. (The comparison of
raindrops with the shedding of flowers is common in India and well
known by the compound term _pushpa-vrishti_).

6. Take this seat said he, and stretched with his hand a newly shorn
rind of the Kalpa tree; this he had plucked with his own hand, nor
needed the help of his attendant crows in this gladsome task.

7. On the rising of Bhusunda, the menials also arose from their seats,
and then on seeing the sage seated on his seat, they looked to and
betook themselves to their respective seats and posts.

8. Then having refreshed myself with the sweet scent of the Kalpa
creepers all about me, I was surrounded by all the birds that gathered
round me, and had their chief sitting face to face in front of me.
(This time worn etiquette of old India is still in vogue in the
politest courts of the world).

9. Having offered me the water and honey for my refreshment, together
with the honorarium worthy of me, the high minded Bhusunda felt the
cheer of his mind, and then accosted me with complaisance and in words
sweet as honey. (The serving of honey and water to guests of yore
served the offering of brandy and water of modern fashion).

10. Bhusunda said:--O lord! thou hast after long favoured us with your
kind visit, which has by its ambrosial influence resuscitated our arbor
and ourselves. (Such is the visit of a superior to an inferior).

11. I ween, O great Muni! that art honoured of the honourable, that it
is by virtue of my long earned virtues that you are now brought to this
place, and want to be informed from where your course is bent to my
humble abode.

12. You sir, that have long wandered amidst the great gloom of this
world, and know its errors by your infallible experience, must have at
last in the peace of your mind. (Peace after broils and strife. _Pax
post turba_).

13. What is it that makes you take this trouble on yourself today, is
what we wished to be informed at present; and your answer to those that
are expectant of it, will be deemed as a great favour by them.

14. It is by the sight of your holy feet, O venerable sage! that we
are put to the knowledge of every thing; and yet our obligation at
this uncalled for call of yours here, emboldens us to ask this farther
favour of yours. (Nobody asks nobody, that has nothing to do with him).

15. We know that it is your remembrance of us among the long living,
that has directed your attention towards us, and made your holiness to
sanctify this place by your gratuitous visit to us.

16. Though thus we know this as the cause of your calling into us; yet
it is our desire of satisfying ourselves with the sweetness of your
nectarious words, that has prompted to propose this query to you at
present.

17. In this manner did the longival crow, that was clear sighted
with his knowledge of the three times, deliver his inquiry by way of
formality.

18. Vasishtha answered--Yes, O king of birds! it is true as thou sayst,
that I have come here thus to see thy diuturnal self; (because the
aged are honoured as sages, and their shrines are visited as those of
saints).

19. You are verily very fortunate with your cold heartedness, and your
sagacity has haply saved you from falling into the dangerous snares of
this world.

20. Now sir, deign to remove my doubt regarding to your anility, and
tell me truly of what family you are born, and how you come to know
what is worth knowing (respecting the origin and end of beings, and
their good or bad lot afterwards).

21. Tell me sir, if you remember the length of life that you have
passed, and if you recollect by your long sightedness how you came to
be settled in this lodging. (Lit. who appointed this place for your
habitation).

22. Bhusunda replied, I will relate to you all, O great sage! that
you ask of me, and your great soul shall have to hear it attentively
without any inadvertence of your mind.

23. It is certain, O venerable sir! that the topics, which deserve the
attention of great minded souls like yourselves; will prove effective
of destroying the evils of the world, as the influence of the clouds
and their propitious rains remove the heat of the sun.




