CHAPTER LXXXVI.

THE PRODUCTION OF THE POT (OR THE EMBRYONIC CELL).

Argument:--The birth of the Bráhman boy from the seed of Nárada,
preserved in a pot whereby he was called the pot-born, and his
education.


Chúdálá continues:--It is the nature of everything in the extensive
world to be born in its own kind (_i.e._ the similar only springs from
the similar and nothing of a dissimilar kind). All persons and things
continue to go on in it by their desires and tendencies, whether it be
in the directions of virtue or vice or good or evil. (Nature is the
invariable quiddity of a thing; but its desire or inclination is a
variable property or quality of it).

2. When this desire or want of the mind of a man is either diminished
or brought under his control, he is no longer subject to the acts
of goodness or vice but becomes exempt both from merit and demerit;
and their consequences of reiterated births and deaths by the utter
indifference. (Neutrality in action is the way to one's inanity in both
worlds. This is not a right rule since the commission of a good action
is as commendable, as an omission in the discharge of duty is held
culpable in law and morality).

3. Sikhidhwaja rejoined:--O eloquent speaker! your words are as full
of sense as they are of great import to me, they bespeak your great
penetration into the depths of wisdom.

4. My audience of the sweet exultance of your speech has given me
a satisfaction, equal to that of my draught of a large dose of the
ambrosial water.

5. Now be pleased to give me a brief narration of the story of your
birth and pedigree, and I will hear with all my attention your words of
sound sense and wisdom.

6. Please sir to relate unto me, what the son of lotus-Brahmá--the
venerable sage Nárada, did with the seminal strength, which
unconsciously fell from him on the ground.

7. Chúdálá related:--The _muni_ then curbed back the infuriate elephant
of his beastly mind by the strong bridle of prudence; and bound it fast
in the iron chain of the great intelligence.

8. His virile strength which was as hot as fire, resembled the molten
moon melted down by the flame of the final conflagration; and as
liquified as the fluid quick-silver or other metallic solution.

9. The sage who had a water-pot of crystal stone fast by his side, laid
hold of the same and put the fluid semen in it, in the manner of his
depositing the liquid moon-beams in the disc of the moon.

10. There was on one side of the mount of Meru, a projected rock with a
deep cavern in it; the passage of which was not obstructed by the heaps
of stones which lay before it.

11. The _muni_ placed the pot inside that cave as the embryo is
situated in the belly, and he filled the pot with milk which he
produced by his will; as the lord of creation has filled the milky
ocean with its watery milk. (The sages are said to have miraculous
powers by force of their yoga).

12. The _muni_ neglected his sacred offering and brooded over the pot,
as a bird hatches over its egg; and it was in a course of a month that
the foetus grew up in the pot of milk, as the reflexion of the crescent
moon increases in the bosom of the milky ocean.

13. At the end of the month the pot bore a full formed foetus, as the
orb of the moon becomes full in the course of a month; and as the
season of spring produces the lotus bud with its blushing petals.

14. The foetus came out in the fullness of its time, and with the full
possession of all the members of its body; as the full moon rises from
the milky ocean without diminution of any of its digits.

15. The body became fully developed in time, and the limbs were as
beautiful as the horns of the moon shine brightly in the lighted
fortnight.

16. After performance of the initiatory ceremonies (of tonsure and
investiture of the sacred thread); and the sage instructed him in
whatever he knew, as one pours out the contents of one vessel into
another.

17. In course of a short time the boy became acquainted with all the
oral instructions (Vangmaya) of his father, and became an exact ectype
of the venerable sage. (The best son likens his father).

18. The old sage became as illustrious with his brilliant boy, as the
orb of the moon shines brightly with its train of resplendent stars.

19. Once on a time the sage Nárada went to the empyrean of his father
Brahmá accompanied by his young progeny, and there made his obeisance
to the prime progenitor of mankind.

20. The boy also bowed down before his grandsire, who knowing him to be
versed in the vedas and sciences; took him up and set him on his lap.

21. The lord Brahmá pronounced his blessings on the boy, and knowing
him to be born of the pot and acquainted with the vedas; gave him the
name of Kumbha or the pot.

22. Know me O hermit! to be the son of the sage Nárada, and grand son
of the great lotus-born Brahmá himself; and know by the appellation of
Kumbha from my birth into the pot.

23. I have the four vedas for my companions and playmates, and I always
delighted with their company; in the heavenly abode of my lotus-born
grandsire--the Divine Brahmá.

24. Know the Goddess Sarasvatí to be my mother, and the Gáyatrí hymn
as my maternal aunt; my habitation is in the heaven of Brahmá where I
dwell as the grand-child of the lord of creatures.

25. I wonder at my pleasure, throughout the wide extended world; I rove
about with a soul full of felicity, and not on any errand or business
whatever.

26. I walk over the earth without touching it with my feet, and its
flying dust do not approach my person; nor is my body ever fatigued in
all its rambles. (The spiritual body is intangible and unwearied).

27. It happened this day, that I came to behold thy hermitage in the
course of my etherial journey; and so directed my course this way, to
see thee in this place. (This is the substance of my life, as I have
now related unto thee).

28. Thus O forester! I have given you the whole account of my life as
you have heard just now; because it is a pleasure to good people, to
hold conversation with the good and wise.

29. Válmíki said:--As they were talking in this manner the day past
away to its evening service, and the sun set down below the horizon;
the court broke and every one repaired to his evening ablution, and met
again with the rising sun on the next morning.




