CHAPTER LXXV.

SUPINENESS OF BHAGÍRATHA.

Argument:--Great bounty of Bhagíratha and his indigence in consequence;
and his recourse to asceticism with his tutor.


Vasishtha related:--Having heard these monitions from the mouth of his
religious monitor, he determined in his mind what he was about to do,
and set about the execution of his purpose.

2. He passed a few days in devising his project, and then commenced his
_agnishtoma_ sacrifice to the sacred fire, for consecrating his all
to it, for the sake of obtaining his sole object (of Nirvána or being
extinct in the essence of God).

3. He gave away his kine and lands, his horses and jewels, and his
monies without number, to the twice born classes of men and his
relatives, without distinction of their merit or demerit.

4. During three days he gave away profusely all what he had, till at
last he had nothing for himself, except his life and flesh and bones.

5. When his exhaustless treasures were all exhausted, he gave up his
great realm like a straw to his neighbouring enemies, to the great
mortification of his subjects and citizens (paurakas).

6. As the enemy overran his territories and kingdom, and seized his
royal palace and properties; he girt himself in his undergarb, and went
away beyond the limits of his kingdom.

7. He wandered afar through distant villages and desert lands, till at
last he settled himself where he was quite unknown to all, and nobody
knew his person or face or his name and title.

8. Remaining there retired for some time, he became quite composed and
blunt to all feelings from within and without himself; and he obtained
his rest and repose in the serene tranquillity of his soul.

9. He then roved about different countries and went to distant islands
(to see the various manners of men); till at last he turned unawares to
his natal land and city, which was in the grasp of his enemies.

10. There while he was wandering from door to door, as he was led about
by the current of time; he was observed by the citizens and ministers
to be begging their alms.

11. All the citizens and ministers recognized their ex-king Bhagíratha,
whom they honoured with their due homage, and whom they were very sorry
to behold in that miserable plight.

12. His enemy (the reigning prince) came out to meet him, and implored
him to receive back his neglected estate and self-abandoned kingdom;
but he slighted all their offers as trifling straws, except taking his
slender repast at their hands.

13. He passed a few days there and then bent his course to another way,
when the people loudly lamented at his sad condition saying: "Ah! what
has become of the unfortunate Bhagíratha".

14. Then the prince walked about with the calmness of his soul, and
with his contended mind and placid countenance; and he amused himself
with his wandering habits and thoughts, until he came to meet his tutor
Tritala on the way.

15. They welcomed one another, and then joining together, they both
began to wander about the localities of men, and to pass over hills and
deserts in their holy peregrinations.

16. Once on a time as both the dispassionate pupil and his preceptor,
were sitting together in the cool calmness of their dispositions, their
conversations turned on the interesting subject of human life.

17. What good is there in our bearing the frail body, and what do
we lose by our loss of it. (Since neither reap nor lose any real
advantage, either by our having or losing of it at any time, yet we
should bear with it as it is, in the discharge of the duties that have
come down unto us by the custom of the country).

18. They remained quiet with this conclusion, and passed their time
in passing from one forest to another; without feeling any joy above
their inward bliss, or knowing any sorrow or the intermediate state of
joy and grief (which is the general lot of humanity), and the rotatory
course of pleasure and pain in this world.

19. They spurned all riches and properties, the possession of horses
and cattle, and even the eight kinds of supernatural powers (Siddhis)
as rotten straws before the contentedness of their minds.

20. This body which is the result of our past acts, must be borne with
fortitude, whether we wish it or not, as long as it lasts; with his
continued conviction in the discharge of their duties (of asceticism).

21. They like silent sages, hailed with complaisance, whatever of
good or evil, or desirable or undesirable befell to their lot, as the
unavoidable results of their prior deeds; and had their repose in the
heavenly felicity, to which they had assimilated themselves. (So the
sruti: The Divine are one with Divine felicity).




