CHAPTER XIII.

THE TWO YOGAS OF KNOWLEDGE AND REASONING.

Argument.--The two yogas or Habits of restraining the Desires and
Respiration herein before described, are followed by two others: viz.
the Acquisition of knowledge and the Training to reasoning which are
yogas also.


Ráma said:--I am verily becalmed and set at ease, O Brahman! by
relinquishing all my desires, from my full knowledge of their
impropriety; and by my being staid in the state of the liberated, even
in this my present life. (The heaven of the holy, commences in their
earthly life).

2. But tell me, sir, how a man can have his liberation, by restraining
his respirations for a time; and how the restraint of one's breathings,
can put a restriction to his desires, which reside and rise from the
mind; while it belongs to the body and comes in and out of the heart
and lungs. (Nostrils).

3. Vasishtha said:--The means of fording over the ocean of this earth
is known, O Ráma! by the word Yoga or union, which is composed of the
quality of pacifying the mind in either of the two ways or processes
(as shown below).

4. The one is the acquisition of religious instruction, leading to the
knowledge of the soul and of the Supreme soul, and the other is the
restraining of respiration, which you will learn from the lecture that
I am about to deliver.

5. Here Ráma interrupted and said:--Tell me, sir, which of the two
is more delectable, owing to its facility and unpainfulness; and the
knowledge or practice whereof, releases us from all fear and trouble
whatsoever.

6. Vasishtha replied:--Ráma! although I have mentioned here of two
kinds of Yoga, yet the common acceptation of the term, restricts it
to the restriction of breathing. (The vulgar have no idea of esoteric
occultism or _jnana Yoga_, but call him a Yogi, who is employed in his
exoteric practices, of asceticism and austerities, suppression of
breath; and all kinds of wilful pains).

7. The true Yoga is the concentration of the mind in God, which is the
only means of our salvation in this world; and this is achieved in
either way of the regulation of breathing, or perfection in learning,
both of which tend to the one and same effect, of fixing the attention
in divine meditation.

8. The practical yoga by the regulation of respiration, appears as too
arduous a task to some persons, while proficiency in knowledge seems to
be too difficult of attainment to others. But to my understanding the
ascertainment of truth by theoretical knowledge seems to be far better
than practice. (The theoretical meditation is known as the _rája yoga_,
and the forced contraction of the breath is called the _hatha yoga_ or
forced devotion, and is the device of Dattátreya who was an ancient
Rishi also).

9. Ignorance is ever ignorant of truth, which does not lend its light
to us in either our walking or sleeping states. So the ignorant
practiser is always in ignorance both when he is in his meditative
trance [Sanskrit: yogavidyá] or otherwise; but knowledge is always
knowing, both when the knower is awake or asleep.

10. The practical yoga which stands in need of fixed attention, painful
postures, and proper times and places, is impossible to be practiced,
owing to the difficulty of getting all these advantages at all times.

11. I have thus described to you, O Ráma! both the two kinds of yoga
propounded in the sástras, and the superiority of the pure knowledge,
which fills the intellect with its unfading light.

12. The regulation of the breathings, the firmness of the body
and dwelling in sequestered cells, are all I ween as pregnant of
consummation--_siddhi_; but say, which of these is capable of giving
knowledge [Sanskrit: vritti] to the understanding, which is the
greatest perfection in human nature.

13. Now Ráma! if you think it possible for you, to sit quiet with utter
suppression of your breaths and thoughts; then can you attempt to sit
in your sedate posture of meditation without uttering a single word.




CHAPTER XIV.

NARRATIVE OF BHUSUNDA AND DESCRIPTION OF MOUNT MERU.

Argument.--Vasishtha's visit to Meru in expectation of seeing Bhusunda
and his description of the Mountain.


Vasishtha related:--The vast universe, O Ráma! is but an evolution of
the will of the Infinite Brahmá, just as the various representations
in the mirage, are but eversions of solar rays. (Or these are the
reflexions of the self-same Deity, as the Fata Morgana are the reflex
of solar light).

2. Here the divine Brahmá that is born of the lotiform navel of Brahmá,
takes the title of the creator and preserver of all, that has been
produced by the supreme spirit; and is called also the great father of
all, for his producing the prime progenitors of mankind. (Here Brahmá
resembles Adam of the scriptures).

3. This divine being brought me forth from his mind, where fore I am
called the _mánasaputra_ or progeny of the mind, of the mind of this
holy personage. He made me settle first in the fixed polar circle of
the starry frame, I viewed the revolutions of the planetary spheres,
and the successive Manvantaras before me. (The Manus were all the
progeny of the divine mind, whence they bear their name of Manu or
mind-born).

4. Residing once in the imperial court of the lord of gods--Indra, I
heard the accounts of many long living persons and people, from the
mouths of Nárada and other messengers of the gods. (Nárada is the
Mercury of Hindu mythology, and answers an angel of the scriptures).

5. There was once on a time the sage Sálatapá among them; who was a
person of great understanding, a man of honor and taciturn in his
speech; and said by way of conversation:--

6. That there was in the north east summit of Mount Meru, a spot full
of sparkling gems, where there was a _kalpa_ tree of the _chuta_ or
_mango_ kind, which yielded its fruits in all seasons of the year.

7. The tree was covered all over with fresh and beautiful creepers, and
a branch of it extending towards the south, had a large hollow in its
top, containing the nest of birds of various kinds.

8. Among them there was a crow's nest, belonging to one old raven by
name of Bhusunda, who lived quite happy with himself; as the god Brahmá
dwells content in his lotus-bed.

9. There is no one in the womb of this world so long lived as he, nor
even the gods in heaven, can boast a greater longevity than he among
the feathered tribe; and it is doubtful whether there may be another as
old as he in times to come. (Old as Adam and as old as Methuselah).

10. This crony crow was beauteous even in old age, and had become
passionless and great-minded by his long experience. He remained quiet
with the tranquillity of his mind, and was as graceful as he was full
of knowledge of all times. (Achromatic as old Nestor of the present,
past and future--_trikálajna_).

11. If any one may have the long life of this crow, his life becomes
meritorious, and his old age is crowned with sapience. (The vigour of
life is productive of meritorious works, and its decay is fraught with
wisdom).

12. In this manner, he related the virtues of the bird in full, at the
request of the gods in heaven; and did not utter any thing more or
less, before the assembly of the deities who knew all things.

13. After the gods had been satisfied with the narration of the veteran
crow, I felt a great curiosity in me, to see and know more of this
superannuated bird (for who is it that has not an eager desire to learn
the art of longevity).

14. With this desire, I hastened to the spot, where the crow was said
to rest in his happy nest; and I reached in a short time, to the summit
of Meru, which was shining with its precious stones. (The descent
from heaven to the lofty top of Meru could not be long, since the
gods are said to be all situated on this high mountain. ([Sanskrit:
tasminnadrau trayasvimsat vasatihiga nadevatah]), and again ([Sanskrit:
yávatmerausyitadeváh]).)

15. The peak of the mountain was flaming as fire, with the glare of its
gems and red earth--_gairika_, and these painted the upper sky, with
the bright hue of florid honey and sparkling wine.

16. The mountain shone as brightly as it were burning with the blaze
of the last conflagration, and the sky was reddened by their reflexion
with shades of clouds; appearing as the smoke of fire or the blue
lustre of sapphire.

17. The mountain appeared to be formed by a collection of all kinds of
colours on earth, which gave it the appearance of the variegated sky in
west at the time of the setting sun.

18. The flame of fire proceeding from its crater, and emitted through
the crevice on its top, seemed as the culinary fire of the Yogi,
carried up from his bowels to the cranium in Yoga. (This is styled the
Utkranti Yoga or lifting the physical powers, and concentrating them
all in the head--the seat of intellect).

19. The ruddy peaks and pinnacles of Sumeru, resembled his arms and
fingers painted with lac-dye; in order to lay hold on his consort the
fair moon by way of sport. (It means the mountain tops reaching to and
touching the orb of the moon. So Kálidása makes his Himalaya transcend
the sphere of the sun).

20. The lurid flame of wild fire on this mountain, seemed as the
burning blaze of sacrificial fires, which are fed with clarified
butter were rising to heaven. (Hence fire is styled the bearer of our
offerings to the gods above--_havya-váhana_, because there is nothing
on the earth except the flames of fire--that has the power of rising
upwards, whence they are termed _Urdha--jwalana--havir--bhujas_.
([Sanskrit: urdha jvalana havirbhujam]).)

21. The mount with its elevated summit seemed to kiss the face of the
sky, and to raise its fingers in the form of its peaks and pinnacles,
with their blazing gems resembling the nails of the fingers, in order
to count the scattered stars.

22. The clouds were roaring on one side of it with the loud noise of
the drums, and the young plants and creepers were dancing in the
happy arbours on another, clusters of flowers were smiling as blooming
beauties on this side, and the swarms of humming bees were hovering on
them on that.

23. Here the lofty palm trees seemed to be smiling with shewing
their teeth in their denticulated leaves, on seeing the giddy groups
of Apsaras, swinging and strolling about loosely in their amorous
dalliances under their shade.

24. There the celestials were resorting in pairs to their grottos
in the mountain, in order to relieve themselves of their trouble of
trudging over the rugged paths of the craggy mountain; and they were
clothed in the white vest of the open sky (nudity), and having the
stream of Ganges falling from high for their sacred thread. (Here Meru
means any mountain and Ganga is put for any stream descending from it).

25. The hoary mountain stood as a grey headed hermit, holding the
reeds (with which it abounded) as canes in his hand; and the celestial
inhabitants of the mount, rested in the coverts of the creepers, being
lulled to sleep by gurgling sound of the waters falling from precipice
to precipice.

26. The mountain king was crowned by the full blown lotuses that
grow on its top, and was regaled by the sweet fragrance; which the
odoriferous breezes bore from them. It was decorated with the gems of
the starry frame on its crown, and charmed with the sweet songs of the
_gandharvas_ playing their strains on it.

27. His hoary head pierced the silvery region of heaven, and was one
with it in being the abode of the gods.

28. The many coloured tops of Meru, emitting the various colours of the
red, white, black, blue, yellow, and gray stones that are embodied in
its body, lent the sky its variegated hues in the morning and evening,
while the versicolor blossoms on its tops, invited the Heavenly nymphs
to their rambles and sports over them.




