CHAPTER CX.

FINAL EXTINCTION OF SIKHIDHWAJA.

Argument:--Return of the Royal pair and retinue to their realm, their
long reign therein until their ultimate extinction in the Divine source.


Vasishtha related:--Then rose the orient sun above the horizon, like a
brilliant gem appearing out of its containing casket; and dispelled the
darkness of the sky, as the blazing gem enlightens the room with its
rays.

2. His dawning rays pierced the eyes of sleeping men, and oped their
eyelids, as they open the folia of the closed lotuses; and they roused
the lazy world to activity, as if the sun beams gave the sound of the
morning bell. (The _áráti_ bell is rung at dawn, like the matin cry of
the Muezzin, to raise the sleeping men to their morning service).

3. The loving pair rose from their bed of flowers, in the grotto of the
mount brightened by its mineral gold; and sat on their soft and cool
leafy seats, to make their morning prayers and discharge their matin
functions.

4. Then rose Chúdálá and stood before a golden urn of water, where she
made the presence to take his solemn oath by the names of seven oceans
of the earth. (This oath is more binding than swearing by the water of
Ganges).

5. She then made him sit by the sacred water pot, and facing towards
the rising sun in the east; and performed the rite of his installation
to his kingdom, in this sequestered retreat.

6. After the solemnity of the ceremony was over, they both sat on the
same bedding (vishtara), when the god like Chúdálá spoke to her husband
in the following manner:--

7. Now my lord, leave off your quiet character of a _muni_ or hermit,
and assume the vigour of the eight rulers of the upper skies and nether
world. (These ruling powers are Indra, Varuna &c.).

8. After Chúdálá had done speaking in this manner, the prince assented
to what she said; and told her that he will do as she bade him, and
return to my realm with you.

9. He then said to the princess, who was standing at the post of the
warder (_i.e._ who was in attendance); on her inaugurated lord. "Now
will I, my dear, install you in the rank of the queen regent in my turn
and return for yours."

10. Saying so, he caused holy lavation in an adjacent pool, and
inaugurated as the regnant Regina of his royalty and realm.

11. Then the prince requested her to exert the powers, of her
consummation in yoga meditation; and to produce and bring to their
presence a large force and retinue, as they wanted and thought suitable
to their royal dignity.

12. Hearing these words of prince, the praiseworthy princess produced
by the power of her yoga, a body of forces, as large and over-spreading
as bodies of out-stretching clouds in the rainy season.

13. They beheld their cloud like forces, to be composed of lines of
horses and elephants, and flags flying in the air in the form of
scattered clouds, while the forest land was covered over by the feet of
foot-soldiers.

14. The sound of music, resounded in the hollow caves of mountains and
woods; and the flash of the coronets on the head of the soldiers, drove
away the darkness of the sky.

15. Then the royal pair mounted upon a royal elephant, which exuded
with the perfume of its ichor; escorted by the army on both sides of
their procession.

16. The prince Sikhidhwaja sat with the princess on the same seat,
and was accompanied by a mighty force composed of foot-soldiers and
chariots, that furrowed the ground as they drove on forward.

17. The mighty force gushed out like a rolling mountain, and seemed to
blow off and break down the rock and highlands, as the cyclone carries
off every thing in its way.

18. The prince then proceeded from the Mahendra mountain, seeing
on both sides the mountains and flatlands, rivers, forests and
habitations of men, as he went onward with his great array.

19. He showed and pointed out to his royal consort, the places where he
sojourned before, on his way from out of his city, which he now beheld
in his heavenly brightness, upon his arrival there in a little time.

20. All his chiefs and chieftains, advanced to meet their prince; and
welcomed with shouts of his victory, from their heart felt joy or from
the revival of their hopes; on the occasion of his happy return.

21. The prince entered the city, accompanied by his two regiments on
both sides, and attended by bands of musicians playing in concord with
the singing and dancing party.

22. He passed through the market place, and beheld the beauty of the
shops one after the other; and was hailed by groups of the city women,
who pelted their handfuls of flowers and fried rice at him, as he
passed on by them.

23. He saw numbers of flags and banners hoisted on every side, and
beheld strings of pearls hung over the doorways of houses. The women of
the city were singing and dancing in merriment all around, and giving
it the appearance of Kailasa--the happy abode of gods.

24. He entered his royal palace with all his retinue, and was welcomed
by the congratulations of his courtiers and attendants. He gave due
honors to all his servants, and then dismissed the train, as he entered
the inner apartment.

25. He ordered a festivity to be observed for a week, and then employed
himself to the management of the state affairs, and in conducting his
meditation in the inner apartment.

26. He reigned over his realm, for the period of a thousand and ten
rains; and desisted from bearing the burthen of their bodies, and
expired together with his royal consort about the same time.

27. Having quitted his mortal frame, he obtained his extinction like an
oilless and extinguished lamp, and attained the state, whence the high
minded soul, has no more to return and be reborn on earth.

28. It was by his observance of equanimity, that he enjoyed the
peaceful reign of above a thousand years; and had the good fortune to
live and die together with the princess, with whom he became extinct in
the deity at last.

29. It was by his _sama-drishti_ or view of all persons and things
with an even sight and in the same light, and his avoidance of fear
and sorrow, together with his want of pride, envy and enmity, and the
dispassionateness of his disposition, also his observance of the duties
to which he was bound by his birth, that made him put off his death for
more than a thousand cold seasons (years), and a peaceful reign for all
time, with the co-partner of his felicity.

30. Now Ráma, try to imitate this prince, and be like him in every
thing; whose virtues had made him the crown of all other Kings on
earth; who enjoyed all the enjoyments of life, and lived a long life
until he attended his final state of immortality. Do you, O Ráma!
pursue your own callings, and never be sorry at any accident in life.
Be ever prompt and vigilant in your duties, and enjoy the prosperity
both of temporal enjoyments and spiritual liberations at once.




