Notes on the summons were:--"(a) If upon Oath insert 'On Oath.' (b)
Erase the words in italic when summons is issued by Justice acting out
of jurisdiction in which he resides."

There is more untruth and holy malevolence in this summons than Pooley
was ever known to be guilty of in all his life. Mr. Bush charges Mr.
Pooley with "wilfully composing" the words complained of. Everybody
in the parish knew that he had not the mental coherence to "compose"
anything. He had neither spoken against God--for he was a believer in
Him--nor was he a preacher either in pulpit or on street corner. Nor
did he "speak" about God, except when he was being stripped in gaol. His
"scoffing against the Holy Scriptures" merely meant that he was incensed
against priests. The charge that he had published a "scandalous,
impious, blasphemous, and profane libel" was simply the reckless,
false, professional language of the clergyman and lawyer who drew up
the summons, which would be counted unscrupulous and venomous in other
persons. In this summons we have the same profanation of the Queen's
name as we have already seen. How can a monarch expect his office or
character to be held in esteem who permits his or her name to be cited
for the purposes of any bigot who has spite in his heart and falsehood
on his lips? People cease to respect a monarch who has no respect for
himself.

There was more of the evil spirit of untruth in the charges in the
summons than in all Mr. Pooley's vague and honest anger. I went down to
Duloe to see Mr. Bush, and found him residing in a spacious house, with
a pleasant outlook of roads and fields before it, while poor Pooley
lived in wells. Why should one so well-placed as the Rev. Paul Bush
conspire to procure twenty-one months' imprisonment for this friendless,
half-demented parishioner? Very likely Mr. Bush was by nature a
kind-hearted clergyman in whom theology generated--

"Words, Which turned the milk of kindness into curds."

At the trial Pooley, who was entirely undefended received a sentence
of twenty-one months' imprisonment. The son of the judge, Sir John Duke
Coleridge, who prosecuted, said, "It was not the prosecution of
opinion in any sense, but society was to be protected from outrage and
indecency." If so, six weeks' imprisonment was more than sufficient in a
case in which there was no wantonness and only half-insane conviction in
it Mr. Thomas Henry Buckle, the famous historian of Civilisation, wrote
in _Fraser_ an indignant and generous denunciation of the sentence, and
those concerned in it. It was the last great letter of a philosopher in
defence of the mental liberty of a poor man, and no equal to it appeared
in the century. I published an account of Pooley's case, which Buckle
saw. Sir John Duke (who afterwards became Lord Chief Justice Coleridge)
had behaved, as prosecuting counsel, better than I knew, as I
admitted when I did know it. Still, the sentence (twenty-one months'
imprisonment) will always stand on record as atrocious, apart from the
irresponsible condition of the offender. The words said to be "spoken,"
and which were made a count in his indictment, were mere exclamations,
provoked by the irritation of gaolers, which the prisoner had neither
means nor intent of publishing. A barrister in court was struck by the
signs of insanity in Pooley, unnoticed by the preoccupied eyes of the
judge and his son.

Pooley, as we have said, was a well-sinker, a tall, strongly-built man
of honest aspect and of good courage and fidelity, who had descended
into a deep well and rescued his master from death. Though not a
philosopher, Pooley, like some who were, was a wild sort of Pantheist.
He thought this world to be an organism, and believed it to be alive;
and such was the tenderness and reverence of his devotion that nothing
could persuade him to dig a well beyond a certain depth, lest he should
wound the heart of the world.

Some years later Lord Coleridge informed me that he did not press the
case against Pooley, and that he had no idea he was of uncertain mind,
nor did his father suspect it. I thought it was impossible they could be
unaware of it, as it was well known to all Liskeard. In justice to Lord
Coleridge's father, I ought to say, that when he subsequently became
aware of Pooley's condition of mind, he at once consented to his
liberation, and Pooley was taken home, after four months' imprisonment,
in the carriage of the governor of the gaol, who had sympathy for him.
Sir William Molesworth and Sir Erskine Perry were, after Mr. Buckle,
the chief instruments of his liberation. The facts I have related of the
Coleridges were not known to me when I first saw Mr. Buckle, who wrote
upon the information I gave him. Pooley was a resolute man, who had
self-respect and would not wear the prison dress. When it was put upon
him he tore it to shreds, and he was left naked in the dark cell in
which he was confined. He would have been made quite mad had he not been
released when he was.


IV.

The last case in which I supply documentary evidence is that concerning
the limelight placed on the Clock Tower at Westminster. No member of
Parliament had thought of it, nor should I, had I not needed it for my
own convenience. I was then secretary to Mr. (afterwards Sir) Joseph
Cowen. When he wished to take part in a division he would ask me to
ascertain whether the House was sitting. In those days there were two
lamp-posts in Palace Yard with three lights each, which were kept in
while the "House was sitting," but when the "House was up" two of the
lights were extinguished. There was no other sign, and I had often
to ride from Redcliffe Square, Brompton, to Palace Yard before the
signal-light could be seen. The limelight had just been perfected, and
it occurred to me that if an effective light was placed on the
Clock Tower it would be conspicuous for miles around, and members of
Parliament, dining in the suburbs, could learn by that sign when the
House was sitting and its absence would indicate that the House was
up. I wrote to Lord John Manners, giving reasons of Parliamentary
convenience for the institution of such a light Lord John was then First
Commissioner of Works. The following is a copy of the letter directed to
be sent to me:--

"Office of Works, 12, Whitehall Place, S.W." It is requested that any
answer to this letter may be directed to The Private Secretary to the
First Commissioner of H.M. Works.

"8--1--68.

"Sir,--I am desired by Lord John Manners to acknowledge with
thanks the receipt of your letter, and suggestions.

"Your faithful servant,

"H. Stuart Wortlev.

"G. J. Holyoake, Esq."


Nothing was done during Lord John Manners' reign as Commissioner of
Works, but when Mr. A. S. Ayrton became Commissioner of the Board,
he found the letter in the archives of the office, and had the light
erected.




