II

CIBBER AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF SENTIMENTAL COMEDY


1. CIBBER, NOT STEELE, THE IMPORTANT FIGURE IN ITS EARLY DEVELOPMENT.

The fully developed form of sentimental comedy may be said to begin
with Steele’s _Conscious Lovers_ (1772) and to end with the attack
upon it made by Goldsmith, Foote, and their followers. Goldsmith
was “strongly prepossessed in favour of the poets of the last age
and strove to imitate them,”[57] and by his reintroduction of humor
into comedy he exerted a strong influence toward the downfall of the
sentimental type. The end of this vogue is generally well understood,
but the beginning of it has not been investigated with the same
thoroughness. Steele is generally given the credit of being the
innovator who reformed the stage,[58] although Ward and others give
some credit to the work of Cibber. The importance of Cibber in the
development of this form and in the moral reformation of comedy,
the effect of social conditions, and the gradual change from the
Restoration type, have not been fully studied. Colley Cibber was the
most important writer of comedy in preparing the way for the new form,
and practically every element of the later sentimental comedy is found
in his work. But Cibber was not a reformer calling on his age to
repent; he was rather answering a general demand of his time.

Three stages may be discerned in the development of sentimental
comedy: first, that in which the morals of comedy were purified and
the new sentimental material was intermixed with the old humorous
material, represented by the work of Cibber; second, that in which the
sentimental theme is presented with very little comic entertainment,
represented by _The Conscious Lovers_; and third, that in which the
comedy of this second stage degenerates and in which the work becomes
artificial and lifeless, represented by the plays of Holcroft and his
school.

Sentimental comedy as seen in its second phase may be briefly described
as comedy of manners in which the main action tends to inculcate a
moral lesson, in which the incidents no longer deal with illicit
intrigues, and in which the action is complicated by distressingly
pathetic situations. The chief characters are generally serious and
supersensitive in regard to such matters as filial duty, honor, and
the like; and while these persons are in no need of being reformed,
their exaggerated conceptions of honor have caused them to act so
that they are placed in an equivocal position and they appear to the
other characters as vicious. The language is chaste, there is constant
introduction of extremely stilted moralizing, and there is a notable
absence of humor.

Cibber’s work in other lines was conventional and commonplace. It is
true that his _Apology_ is lively and interesting, and his pamphlets in
reply to Pope’s attacks are keen and humorous though vulgar, but the
rest of his prose is extremely conventional. His poetry, except a few
songs, is inexpressibly poor. Aside from one opera in which he takes
the same stand in regard to virtue that he does in his comedies, his
operas are merely the commonplace following of a vogue. His tragedies
are generally imitative; with two exceptions they are adaptations of
Corneille or Shakspere. His farces are about equal in merit to his
poetry, and are devoid of originality.

Nor does Cibber’s life indicate the qualities that appear in his
sentimental comedies. The moral standard he displays in his pamphlets
in reply to Pope is far from high, and from the testimony of his
contemporaries concerning his personal character it would seem that
he was far from being the sort of man who would set about reforming
anything. And in all probability he would not have done so if there had
not been a general public movement in that direction.


2. SENTIMENTAL COMEDY A PRODUCT OF VARIOUS FORCES.

But sentimental comedy did not spring full grown from the brain of a
single man. Nor was it the result of a single revolutionary force.
Sentimental comedy resulted from gradual modifications of the drama
of the time, developing from the prevalent type little by little
until it finally appeared as an independent form. The reform of the
stage was not an isolated phenomenon, nor was it directly the result
of the attacks made by Collier and others. Rather are all these the
result of a changed public conscience, which was manifested not merely
in literature and on the stage, but in the Revolution of 1688 and a
subsequent social reformation as well.

Immediately after the Restoration there may be discovered two elements
in the life of the nation which had an influence both on the form and
on the content of literature. On the one side was the court, whose
standards affected both the form and content in the direction of
foreign models. Through the long period of exile on the continent,
Charles and his followers had become foreign in their literary taste
and they had great influence in the direction of a French type as
regards form; and because of the low and vicious standards of living
prevalent at court their influence stimulated the sympathetic handling
of low and vicious subjects.

On the other hand, there were the people, strictly native in their
preference, who influenced the drama in the direction of native
standards in form, and Puritan standards in content. As to the form
of comedy, there was nothing essentially antagonistic in these two
influences; the one could easily combine with the other so that a new
thing, congruous and consistent, might result; but in the material
presented antagonism was bound to arise and soon did arise. In the
development of sentimental comedy from the type which predominated
during and after the Restoration, there was not at first any
modification in structural elements; the comedy of manners was adopted,
so far as form was concerned; the change, which was gradual and was a
direct response to changed social and moral conditions, was at first
entirely in the matter of content. This change first appears in the
sincere reformation of the hero at the end of the play; then in the
attitude towards cuckoldom, which Restoration comedy had treated as a
humorous fact; and then in the character of the language, which was
altered in the direction of moral decency.

Under Charles II and James II the court, on which the theatre depended
for its right to live and also for its patronage, was vicious and
depraved. Its one grace was wit, and that it had in a superlative
degree.


3. PROGRESS IN ENGLISH SOCIETY.

The people in general, except the court and those more or less
fashionable classes of society which would naturally follow it,
were not affected by this mode. They learned to despise Charles II
personally because of his lack of honor and morals, and hated his
followers as well as their mode of life. In the city the Puritan
element, which was “at once the most substantial and sober” part of the
community, began to exercise some of the same control of manners and
morals that it had practised under the commonwealth, and checked the
constant disregard of its moral principles by the court.

But even during this corrupt time there were manifestations of activity
on the part of other elements of society, which looked toward the
betterment of conditions. In the life of the state there were events
which made for general progress and a more moral life among all the
people. With special reference to the regulation and restraint of the
theatre, certain elements in Parliament attempted, in 1669, to tax
the playhouses, which were situated in the disreputable part of town
and had become centers of prostitution; but the ministers of the king
intervened and the attempt to compel some restraint was unsuccessful.

In the reigns of William and Mary and of Anne a reaction is seen in the
life of the court, and there appears a still greater progress in all
classes of society.

The expulsion of the Stuarts brought about certain very positive
results which made for progress in all directions. So too the principle
of natural action and reaction was operating; but, considering the
historical circumstances, it was only to be expected that the reaction
toward a more moral and saner view of life should be less marked and
less rapid than the preceding reaction from Puritanism.

Until after the downfall of the Stuarts, the Protestants in England had
never been united; but after that event even Presbyterians joined with
ecclesiastics of the Church of England in public ceremonies on terms of
friendship. Now that the question of political and religious supremacy
was permanently settled, the Protestants were free to turn to some of
the questions which are popularly supposed to be the real objects of
religious organizations--worship and the encouragement of right living.
However far it may have failed to measure up to modern ideas in these
respects, the church now began to be a greater moral force.

The court became a very different sort of place. However far William
might fall short of middle class standards of today, he was a very
different sort of man from Charles or James, and had a very different
influence. As opposed to the Catholicism of the Stuarts, he was a
Presbyterian. Instead of haunting the theatre, where Charles found
more than one mistress among the actresses, William never even showed
himself at the theatre. Because of William’s prolonged absences on
the continent, during which Mary reigned in her own right, the person
of the queen became more important than in former reigns. Mary “had
been educated only to work embroidery, to play on the spinnet, and to
read the Bible and the _Whole Duty of Man_.”[59] “Her character was
unimpeachable, and by the influence of the king and queen the whole
court became most proper, even if it was somewhat dull.” But unlike
her husband, she went frequently to the theatre, where she showed
special favor for Shadwell and where she ordered such plays as _The
Old Bachelor_, _The Double Dealer_, and _The Committee_. It must be
admitted that Mary’s taste in regard to plays did not show great
literary or moral discrimination.

Both under William and Mary and under Anne the court took positive
grounds on moral questions. In Evelyn’s _Diary_ for February 19, 1690,
we read:

  “The impudence of both sexes was now become so greate and so
  universal, persons of all ranks keeping their courtesans publicly,
  that the King had lately directed a letter to the Bishops to order
  their Cleargy to preach against that sin, swearing, &c. and to put
  the Ecclesiastical Laws in execution without any indulgence.”

Mary, on July 9, 1691, wrote to the justices of the peace directing
that they execute all laws against the profanation of the Sabbath, and
even went so far as to have constables stationed on street corners to
capture pies and puddings that were being taken to the bakers to be
cooked on that day. In 1697 and 1698 King William issued two orders
concerning the acting of anything contrary to good morals or manners.
Queen Anne, who never went to the public theatre, made frequent
proclamations against immoral plays, masked women, and the admittance
of spectators behind the scenes, and in 1703 she issued a proclamation
against vice in general.

Altogether, the forces of the court and of the government were
acting in accord to suppress the abuses which their predecessors had
countenanced both by favor and by participation.

But however potent may have been the influence of the court, the real
movement for social reform came from the people, whose will the court
was really carrying out. The movement on the part of the people was
forwarded by the rise of various societies which were established for
moral, philanthropic, and religious purposes.[60]

The Society for the Reformation of Manners, inaugurated by a small
number of gentlemen in 1692, was probably the most influential and
best known of these organizations. It was organized primarily for the
purpose of informing on evildoers, and that there might be no criticism
concerning their sincerity, the fines were paid over to charity. In
addition to carrying on this work of informing, the society established
quarterly lectures on moral subjects, secured the preaching of sermons
on its objects, and in 1699 it claimed to have secured thousands of
convictions.[61] The church was brought into the movement by Archbishop
Tenison’s circular to the clergy encouraging them to cooperate with the
laity in the movement. This movement went farther than the prosecution
of overt acts against morality, for in 1701-2 the players at Lincoln’s
Inn Fields were prosecuted for uttering impious, lewd, and immoral
expressions.[62]


4. COLLIER.

Collier’s attack on the stage, published in 1698, was no doubt a potent
influence in crystallizing public opinion in regard to the drama, but
it does not stand alone; it is merely a sign of a movement which the
stage had begun to notice and profit by several years previously.
During the year 1698 not less than sixteen books and pamphlets were
published in the controversy. Collier’s book had great influence in
furthering the work of reformation; but, low as was the tone of the
drama at the time, one must confess that in some particulars Collier is
radical and far-fetched in his arguments and conclusions.

Cibber, though he had two years previously written a play with a
distinct reformatory and moral purpose, did not much relish Collier’s
attack or agree with it. In the prologue to _Xerxes_ he intimates that
Collier might prove a good index for those who desired to read immoral
literature:

    “Thus ev’n sage Collier too might be accus’d,
     If what h’as writ, thro’ ignorance, abus’d:
     Girls may read him, not for the truth, he says,
     But to be pointed to the bawdy plays.”

In _The Careless Husband_ we find Lord Morelove saying:

  “Plays now, indeed, one need not be so much afraid of; for since the
  late short-sighted view of them, vice may go on and prosper; the
  stage dares hardly show a vicious person speaking like himself, for
  fear of being call’d prophane for exposing him.”

To this Lady Easy replies that,

  “’Tis hard, indeed, when people won’t distinguish between what’s
  meant for contempt, and what for example.”

Perhaps Cibber’s most interesting contribution to the controversy is
contained in his dedication of _Love Makes a Man_, published in the
first edition, but omitted in the collected edition of his plays:

  “But suppose the stage may have taken too loose a liberty? Is there
  nothing to be said for it? Have not all sciences been guilty? Was
  it to be expected in a reign of pleasure, peace and madness, that
  the poets should not be merry? Did not the court then lead up the
  dance? And did not the whole nation join in it? Was it not mere Joan
  Sanderson,[63] and did not the lawn-sleeves, cuffs, and cassocks
  fill up the measure? But since those dancing days are over, I hope
  our enemies will give us leave to grow wise, and sober, as well as
  the rest of our neighbors: Why shall we not have the liberty to
  reform, as well as the clergy, and lawyers? I believe upon a fair
  examination we may find, that prophaneness, cruelty, and passive
  obedience, are now less than ever the business of the stage, the
  bench or the pulpit; and I doubt not, but we can produce examples of
  new plays, lawyers, and pastors that have met with success without
  being obliged to immorality, bribery, or politics ...

  “Now if the stage must needs down, because ’tis possible it may
  seduce, as instruct; the same rule of policy might forbid the use of
  physic, because not only their patients, but physicians themselves
  die of common diseases; or call in the milled crowns, because they
  are but so many patterns for coiners to counterfeit by, or might
  as well suppress the Courts of Judicature, because some persons
  have suffered for what a succeeding reign has made a new law, that
  makes that law that sentenced them illegal: The same conclusion
  might discountenance our religion, because we sometimes find pride,
  hypocricy, avarice, and ignorance in its teachers: So that if our
  zealous reformers do not stick fairly to their method we may in time
  hope to see our nation flourish without either wit, health, money,
  law, conscience, or religion....

  “But this sort of reformation I hope will never be thoroughly
  wrought, while the king, and the Established Church have any friends:
  The stage I am sure was never heartily oppressed but by the enemies
  of both.”

Though Cibber thought Collier extreme and unjust in his criticism,
his own attitude concerning the abuses of the stage was hardly less
censorious than Collier’s, but he blames the audiences for the low
moral standards of the entertainments:

  “However gravely we may assert, that Profit ought always to be
  inseparable from the Delight of the Theatre; nay, admitting that
  the Pleasure would be heighten’d by the uniting them; yet, while
  Instruction is so little the Concern of the Auditor, how can we hope
  that so choice a Commodity will come to a Market where there is so
  seldom a Demand for it?

  “It is not to the Actor therefore, but to the vitiated and low Taste
  of the Spectator, that the Corruptions of the Stage (of what kind
  soever) have been owing.”[64]

His own attitude, which he held from the first of his career as a
dramatist, may be illustrated what he says in the _Apology_:[65]

  “Yet such Plays (entirely my own) were not wanting at least, in what
  our most admired Writers seem’d to neglect, and without which, I
  cannot allow the most taking Play, to be intrinsically good, or
  to be a Work, upon which a Man of Sense and Probity should value
  himself: I mean when they do not, as well _prodesse_, as _delectare_,
  give Profit with Delight! The _Utile Dolci_ was, of old, equally
  the Point; and has always been my Aim, however wide of the Mark, I
  may have shot my Arrow. It has often given me Amazement, that our
  best Authors of that time, could think the Wit, and Spirit of their
  Scenes, could be an Excuse for making the Looseness of them publick.
  The many Instances of their Talents so abused, are too glaring, to
  need a closer Comment, and are sometimes too gross to be recited.
  If then to have avoided this Imputation, or rather to have had the
  Interest, and Honour of Virtue always in view, can give Merit to
  a Play; I am contented that my Readers should think such Merit,
  the All, that mine have to boast of.--Libertines of mere Wit, and
  Pleasure, may laugh at these grave Laws, that would limit a lively
  Genius: But every sensible honest Man, conscious of their Truth,
  and Use, will give these Ralliers Smile for Smile, and shew a due
  Contempt for their Merriment.”

Davies tells us:[66]

  “So well did Cibber, though a professed libertine through life,
  understand the dignity of virtue, that no comic author has drawn more
  delightful and striking pictures of it. Mrs. Porter, on reading a
  part, in which Cibber had painted virtue in the strongest and most
  lively colors, asked him how it came to pass, that a man, who could
  draw such admirable portraits of goodness, should yet live as if he
  were a stranger to it?--‘Madam,’ said Colley, ‘the one is absolutely
  necessary, the other is not.’”

Possibly this inconsistency in personal conduct and public confession
explains why comedies which aimed to teach lessons of virtue were
sentimental and did not ring true. The men who wrote them wrote from
the head and not from the heart, influenced by a growing public demand
and without real sincerity or conviction.


5. CHARACTERISTICS OF RESTORATION COMEDY.

Restoration comedy up to about 1696, while it was essentially a native
development, was influenced both in technique and in content by the
drama to which the court had been accustomed in its exile in France.
The Jonsonian comedy was developing both in the period immediately
preceding the Commonwealth and during the Restoration into the same
sort of thing that we have here, and Shadwell, poet laureate and
especial favorite of Queen Mary, definitely took the work of Jonson
as his model. The Jonsonian satire had thrown emphasis on fundamental
traits of human nature, but in this later type satire is centered
on manners, dress, the non-essential elements of life, though the
characters continue to be embodiments of single traits. Molière, whose
earliest effective follower in England was Etherege, taught the English
writers of the comedy of manners to aim at polish, refinement of style
and dialogue, and his influence confirmed the tendency of English
comedy to follow the unities as they were then understood. Restoration
comedy, then, is native Jonsonian comedy, influenced by the comedy of
Molière.[67] The chief literary sources of its plots are the comedies
of Beaumont and Fletcher, of Molière, of Corneille, and Spanish
comedies and novels.

Though the late Elizabethans had been gross in word, there had always
been in their work a tendency to punish vice and reward virtue, or at
least to make vice ridiculous. But in the Restoration this grossness
becomes grossness of word, character, and idea, and it is not the
violator of virtue that is made ridiculous, but his victim. The
Elizabethan gaiety, spontaneity, healthy overflow of spirits, become a
cynicism which is absurd in its artificiality and deliberate pose. The
Jonsonian reaction from earlier Elizabethan romanticism continues its
advance toward realism.

The Restoration dramatist lacks the power to construct effective
plots. He is able to handle his separate incidents with skill, but
when it comes to sustaining an action through five acts, he fails. His
chief fault lies in too great intricacy, excessive elaboration, and
complexity, which are due to his endeavor to tell too many stories.
In the construction of his plays he commonly takes two, and sometimes
three, plays from Molière, or Beaumont and Fletcher, to form one play
of his own. Hence there is in the handling of the plot a lack of unity.
Furthermore, in his extreme elaboration of single situations, which
one must admit have qualities to make them lively and interesting
on the stage, the dramatist fails in the great essential quality of
probability; if one regards the unity of time, he makes his stories
impossible. Lack of sequence is caused by the constant interruption of
conversation, which is brilliant and entertaining in itself, but has
nothing to do with the story.

The dramatist tends to the elaboration of stock themes, dealing with
the pursuit of illicit pleasure, assignations, and love intrigues. The
typical story might be stated as follows: a young man is entangled with
one or more women, a widow, the wife of an elderly or foolish husband,
or a mistress whom he is keeping or who is keeping him, and while he
is carrying on these intrigues he falls in love with the virtuous
young woman he eventually wins. Sometimes his mistresses object to his
marrying some one else, sometimes they do not, and in the latter case
the opposing force is centered in a rapacious guardian or some other
complicating person or circumstance. There are usually many minor
love affairs, sometimes legitimate, sometimes not, and usually so
complicated that it is difficult to keep the various threads separate.
Collier did no injustice when he said that “the stage poets make their
principal persons vicious and reward them at the end of the play.”

The love is mere sensuality. There is tacit acknowledgment that the men
will be untrue to their wives and a fear on the part of the husbands
that their wives will cuckold them.[68] This fear is not because of any
moral scruples, but is merely because of the ridicule that cuckoldom
brought on the husband. The treatment is frankly gross, licentious,
cynical.

In a sense this treatment is highly realistic; to this extent, that it
is a general reflection of the standards and manners of the life of the
court. The fashions are contemporary, the manners and morals are those
of the upper classes. The playwrights confine themselves to a limited
section of but a part of the people. Social and religious institutions
are treated so as to make them ridiculous and contemptible.

That any other treatment would have been difficult is seen by
considering the relationship existing between the theatre and the
court. The theatre had its authority for existence directly from the
court, one theatre receiving its license from the King, the other
from the Duke of York, while the companies of actors were known as
the King’s or the Duke’s servants.[69] These licenses were moreover
revocable at the pleasure of those who gave them. Controversies and
differences within the theatre were often settled personally by the
King or Duke, and Charles is said to have suggested subjects to the
dramatists in many instances. With so direct and personal a relation,
anything other than compliance with the taste of the court could result
in nothing but the downfall of the theatre. The theatre’s very life
depended on its selection and presentation of themes that would satisfy
and reflect the taste of the most morally degraded court that England
has ever had.

The characterization in these plays is conventional and often vague.
For example, it may be laid down as an almost invariable rule that a
widow is never virtuous. In the embodiment of a single trait there
is the continued tendency to exaggeration seen in the “humourous”
characterization of Jonson, with the same use of descriptive
names--Courtall, Mrs. Frail, Lady Wishfort, Justice Clodpate--to save
the labor of characterization. The characters are likewise lacking in
complexity and development.

There is the tendency to Jonsonian division of characters into dupes
and dupers,[70] but this division is not so clear as in Jonson, nor is
the division based on the essential qualities of human nature, but is
rather on the basis of wit and power in repartee. The heroes are all
witty, usually wealthy, popular, and their life work is the pursuit of
women. The women are all witty, beautiful, and all rakes, except the
heroine, and even the heroines bid fair to become so in a few months
after marriage. The hero or heroine of one play might be the hero or
heroine of any other play so far as any distinctive characterization is
concerned.

There is the pretended wit, a simpleton who apes the men of wit
and fashion, who thinks himself most clever, and who is perfectly
unconscious of the fact that he is being made a butt for the wit of
the sensible characters. Such are the Dapperwits, the Witwouds, and
the Tattles. Somewhat similar is the fop who imitates the French,
thinks only of his dress, his appearance, and the figure he makes. He
is all ostentation, is entirely self-centered and simple in his mental
processes, but is really not such a fool as one imagines at first.
Etherege’s Sir Fopling Flutter, and Cibber’s Sir Novelty Fashion--the
Lord Foppingtons of _The Relapse_ and _The Careless Husband_--are two
well drawn presentations of this character. An interesting female type
is the Miss Hoyden-Prue-Hippolyta young woman, who has been kept in
secluded ignorance of the world, but who shows a sudden ingenuity,
knowledge of the world, and desire for the sensual joys of life. There
are, of course, the elderly cuckolds, dominated and fooled by their
wives, and the wives who profess virtue but do not practise it.

That the view here given is not prejudiced by modern standards may
be seen by a description of the characters by one of the dramatists
themselves. Shadwell in the preface to _The Sullen Lovers_ expresses
himself, not without vigor:

  “But in the Plays, which have been wrote of late, there is no such
  thing as perfect Character, but the two chief Persons are commonly
  a Swearing, Drinking, Whoring, Ruffian for a Lover, and an impudent
  ill-bred _Tomrig_ for a Mistress, and these are the fine People of
  the play; and ... almost any thing is proper for them to say; but
  their chief Subject is Bawdy, and Profaneness, which they call _Brisk
  Writing_, when the most dissolute of Men, that relish those things
  well enough in Private, are shock’d at ’em in Publick.”

The dialogue, which often interrupts the movement of the plot, and
often surpasses in interest the more solid quality of representation
of life, is usually marked by the most brilliant and biting wit, by
keenly satiric repartee, and by epigrammatic polish. The dialogue has
often nothing to do with the story, but is merely the exhibition of
the author’s ability in the cynical treatment of contemporary manners.
The attitude is one of satire and raillery against all established
institutions, against marriage, the manners of society, the Puritans,
the newly developing sciences, the court, dueling, the country and
its inhabitants, the opera, the new songs and novels, the affectation
of foreign airs, the adoption of foreign words, poetry and dilettante
writing, polite literary conversation, legal abuses, and almost
everything that one can conceive.

The locality in which the plays are set is extremely narrow at
first, being confined to the town; for most of the plays are set in
London, in localities familiar to the audiences. Within the class
and localities to which the comedy restricts itself, it is a most
interesting social document; but it must always be remembered that it
is no sense representative of the whole people. Sometimes we are taken
to Spain or Italy, but it is Spain or Italy only in name, the people
and the customs are all English. The scene may sometimes be one of the
fashionable watering places in England; but it is never in the despised
country.

Whether one agrees with it or not it is well to keep in mind Lamb’s
defense in his essay _On the Artificial Comedy of the Last Century_:

  “We have been spoiled with ... the ... drama of common life; where
  the moral point is everything; where, instead of the fictitious
  half-believed personages of the stage (the phantoms of old comedy)
  we recognize ourselves, our brothers, aunts, kinsfolk, allies,
  patrons, enemies,--the same as in life.... “I do not know how it is
  with others, but I feel the better always for the perusal of one of
  Congreve’s--nay, why should I not add even of Wycherley’s--comedies.
  I am the gayer at least for it; and I could never connect those
  sports of a witty fancy in any shape with any result to be drawn
  from them to imitation in real life. They are a world of themselves
  almost as much as fairyland.... But in its own world do we feel
  the creature is so very bad?--The Fainalls and the Mirabels, the
  Dorimants and the Lady Touchwoods, in their own sphere, do not offend
  my moral sense; in fact they do not appeal to it at all. They seem
  engaged in their proper element. They break through no laws, or
  conscientious restraints. They know of none. They have got out of
  Christendom into the land--what shall I call it?--of cuckoldry--the
  Utopia of gallantry, where pleasure is duty, and the manners perfect
  freedom. It is altogether a speculative scene of things, which has no
  reference whatever to the world that is.... He [Congreve] has spread
  a privation of moral light ... over his creations; and his shadows
  flit before you without distinction or preference. Had he introduced
  a good character, a single gush of moral feeling, a revulsion of the
  judgment to actual life and actual duties, the impertinent Goshen
  would have only lighted to the discovery of deformities, which now
  are none, because we think them none.... “... When we are among
  them [the characters of Congreve and Wycherley], we are amongst a
  chaotic people. We are not to judge them by our usages. No reverend
  institutions are insulted by their proceedings,--for they have none
  among them. No peace of families is violated,--for no family ties
  exist among them. No purity of the marriage bed is stained,--for
  none is supposed to have a being.... There is neither right nor
  wrong,--gratitude or its opposite,--claim or duty,--paternity or
  sonship....

  “The whole is a passing pageant.... But, like Don Quixote, we take
  part against the puppets, and quite as impertinently.... We would
  indict our very dreams.”


6. BEGINNINGS OF THE CHANGE IN THE DRAMA.

Such had been the conditions surrounding the drama and in the drama
itself before the reformation began. When one comes to look at the
stage and the audiences, one finds very little indication of change
at first. In 1682 there seems to have been objection to _London
Cuckolds_ on the ground of indecency, and Ravenscroft in the prologue
to _Dame Dobson_ (1682) claims to have complied with the objections
which had been raised by making his own play dull and civil. In 1684
appeared Southerne’s first comedy, _The Disappointment_, which he calls
a “play,” and in this we have the serious treatment of the marriage
relations and the preservation of a wife’s chastity. Throughout,
Southerne’s tendency was towards morality.

In 1696 there begins a real and easily discernible movement towards the
moral treatment of dramatic themes. _The She Gallants_ (1696) was so
offensive to the ladies that it had to be withdrawn; in _She Ventures
and He Wins_ (1696) the man who would carry on an amour with a married
woman is exposed and tricked and made the butt; and in Mrs. Manley’s
_The Lost Lover_ (1696) there is the noticeable introduction of a
virtuous wife.

In 1697, the epilogue to _Boadicea_, a tragedy, tells us that

    “Once only smutty jests could please the town,
     But now (Heav’n help our trade) they’ll not go down.”

Waterhouse[71] finds traces of sentimentality in Vanbrugh’s _Aesop_,
which appeared the same year. Then in 1698 matters were brought to a
head by Collier, and we find Congreve’s _Double Dealer_ advertised to
be acted “with several expressions omitted,” while in _The Way of the
World_ (1700) his muse is somewhat more chaste. _The Provoked Wife_
was altered, probably in 1706, so that the clergy might not seem to be
attacked.

From this time on the changed attitude was increasingly manifest in the
new plays, though the old were still acted with little or no change.

In _The State of the Case Restated_[72] it is contended that the royal
patent to the Drury Lane Theatre was given to Sir Richard Steele for
the purpose of correcting the abuses of the theatre, but that Sir
Richard had not done this; in fact that

  “The same lewd plays were acted and reviewed without any material
  alteration, which gave occasion for that universal complaint against
  the English stage, of lewdness and debauchery, from all the sober and
  religious part of the nation; the whole business of comedy continuing
  all this time to be the criminal intrigues of fornication and
  adultery, ridiculing of marriage, virtue, and integrity, and giving
  a favorable turn to vicious characters, and instructing loose people
  how to carry on their lewd designs with plausibility and success:
  thus among other plays they have revived _The Country Wife_, _Sir
  Fopling Flutter_, _The Rover_, _The Libertine Destroyer_, and several
  others, and it is remarkable, that the knight, or coadjutors, had
  condemned _Sir Fopling Flutter_, as one of the most execrable and
  vicious plays that ever was performed in public.”

The change that was occurring may be fairly illustrated by quotations
from plays by Etherege and Steele, which are characteristic of the
alterations not only as to morals but as to moralizing. In speaking of
marriage Etherege says, “your nephew ought to conceal it [his marriage]
for a time, madam, since marriage has lost its good name; prudent men
seldom expose their own reputations, till ’tis convenient to justify
their wives;”[73] while Steele’s sentiment is that “wedlock is hell if
at least one side does not love, as it would be Heaven if both did.”[74]


7. CIBBER’S COMEDIES.

Cibber at the very outset of his career as a dramatist, in _Love’s Last
Shift_ (1696), deliberately attempted to reform the stage, and that
the audience was ready for the innovation is shown by the way it was
received, for we are told that “never were spectators more happy in
easing their minds by uncommon and repeated plaudits. The honest tears,
shed by the audience, conveyed a strong reproach to our licentious
poets, and was to Cibber the highest mark of honor.”[75] Davies further
gives Cibber the credit of being the first in reforming the English
stage, and of founding English sentimental comedy. “The first comedy,
acted since the Restoration, in which were preserved purity of manners
and decency of language, with a due respect to the honor of the
marriage-bed, was Colley Cibber’s _Love’s Last Shift, or The Fool in
Fashion_.”[76] Cibber himself makes no claim to decency of language,
nor is it found to any greater extent in this play than in the other
plays of the period. Certainly there can be nothing bolder than the
first act, or the epilogue, which reads as follows:

    “Now, gallants, for the author. First, to you
     Kind city gentlemen o’ th’ middle row;
     He hopes you nothing to his charge can lay,
     There’s not a cuckold made in all his play.
     Nay, you must own, if you believe your eyes,
     He draws his pen against your enemies:
     For he declares, today, he merely strives
     To maul the beaux--because they maul your wives.
     Nor, sirs, to you whose sole religion’s drinking,
     Whoring, roaring, without the pain of thinking,
     He fears he’s made a fault you’ll ne’er forgive,
     A crime beyond the hopes of a reprieve:
     An honest rake forego the joys of life,
     His whores and wine, t’ embrace a dull chaste wife!
     Such out-of-fashion stuff! but then again,
     He’s lewd for above four acts, gentlemen.

           *       *       *       *       *

     Four acts for your coarse palates were design’d,
     But then the ladies taste is more refin’d,
     They, for Amanda’s sake, will sure be kind.”

The main action, that which deals with the reformation of the wandering
husband, seems to be original with Cibber in every respect. It deals
with the reformation of a husband who eight or ten years before has
deserted his young wife for a dissolute life on the continent, and who
returns to England still more degenerate in mind and morals than when
he left, and so entirely depleted in purse that he has not money enough
to buy a meal or pay for a night’s lodging for himself and his servant.
The husband is finally led to return to his wife, whose appearance has
so changed that he does not recognize her, by her pretense of being a
new mistress. This subterfuge is more or less remotely suggestive of
Shakspere’s _All’s Well that Ends Well_ and Shirley’s _Gamester_, both
of which have been suggested as its source; but it owes nothing to them
in the working out of the situation.

The theme is practically that of _The Careless Husband_: the
reformation of a husband not entirely spoiled at heart. The moral
teaching is that there is the same pleasure in legitimate enjoyment as
in the baser and illicit sort.

The innovation consists in the very moral ending of the piece,
particularly in the definite decision of the hero to reform, a
determination which he expresses as follows:

  “By my example taught, let every man, whose fate has bound him to
  a marry’d life, beware of letting loose his wild desires: for if
  experience may be allow’d to judge, I must proclaim the folly of a
  wandering passion. The greatest happiness we can hope on earth,

    And sure the nearest to the joys above,
    Is the chaste rapture of a virtuous love.”

It is to be noticed that the illicit affair of Sir Novelty Fashion and
Mrs. Flareit is made ridiculous and not happy at the end, nor does Sir
Novelty acquire a mistress or a wife who has previously been chaste.
Likewise there is no husband who is made ridiculous by being cuckolded,
and the only amour, if it can be called an amour, that which Amanda’s
maid unwillingly has with Snap, is made right the next morning by the
marriage of the two.

On the other hand, the play, aside from these particulars, exhibits
the technique and the material of the typical Restoration comedy.
The chief incident deals in most frank style with the sex relations
of the hero and heroine, treated essentially in the Restoration way,
with the exception that the audience knows they are man and wife while
the characters do not. The cellar incident is as frank and gross as
anything of the sort in the earlier drama, though in this case the
final outcome is a wedding. There is the same succession of lively and
disconnected incidents, incidents which would go well on the stage, and
which make up five separate threads of story. The substitution of the
name of one person for another in the marriage bond is the same sort of
thing that occurs over and over again in the earlier comedy.[77]

The characters represent the same more or less stiff drawing of
conventional figures. Sir Novelty Fashion is of the same family as Sir
Fopling Flutter; Lovelace and Young Worthy are the same drunken rakes
as those who make the principal characters in the unreformed drama,
with the exception that here they are not presented to us as carrying
on their amours. Snap is the witty servingman who is invariably paired
with the maid of the heroine in Restoration comedy. There is the same
presentation of local scenes, particularly that in the park; there is
the same coarse speech; and there is the same interruption of the story
by raillery.

But the play as already suggested is a very distinct step in advance in
its treatment of fundamental morality, and marks a conscious beginning
of a new mode; not an inconsiderable achievement for the first play of
an author twenty-four years old.

The two plots of _Woman’s Wit_ (1697) are entirely dissimilar in tone
and dramatic handling, and, moreover, have no essential connection with
each other. The main plot, which gives the name to the piece, is in the
Restoration manner, while the sub-plot, which deals with the Rakishes,
is in the mould of the minor late Elizabethans. In its portrayal of
manners it belongs to the type represented by the plays of Brome,
marked by coarseness rather than finish, and implying about the same
standard of morals.

The main plot consists of a series of complications caused by the
efforts of Longeville to unmask Leonora’s unfaithfulness to Lovemore,
to whom she is engaged. She convinces Lovemore that Longeville’s
efforts are the result of a plot, the purpose of which is to alienate
Lovemore and Leonora so that Longeville may have her to himself; and
there then follows one complication after another, until the characters
are at last gathered together and Leonora is made to confess her
duplicity.

The situation on which the main action is based is original and highly
dramatic, but in order to maintain the intrigue Cibber has had to use
incidents which are marked by improbability and dramatic blindness
to such an extent that the action becomes wearisome. Cibber seems to
be groping for something different from the conventional Restoration
intrigue. His conception is worthy of more success than he attained,
but he lacked the dramatic skill and experience to carry it out.

Some of the character drawing is good. Longeville and Lovemore are
rather decent young men, but are no doubt too sentimental for success
on the stage at this time. The Rakishes are overdrawn and farcical. The
women, with the exception of Leonora, are lacking in the spontaneity
and wit demanded of seventeenth and early eighteenth century heroines,
and like the men are possibly too sentimental. Leonora is the intriguer
and is the best drawn and most important personage in the play. Her
downfall is the result of her own character and conduct, and in the
disapproval of her character and actions Cibber has repeated, to some
extent, views he expressed in his first play.

The vulgar sub-plot which deals with Old Rakish and Young Rakish, when
separated from _Woman’s Wit_ and acted in 1707 as _The School Boy_, was
a greater success than the original play. With the exception of the
change in the names of some of the personages, minor alterations of the
dialogue, the omission of parts of the incidents, and the addition of
such incidents as are necessary to make it stand by itself, the play is
verbatim as it appeared when a part of _Woman’s Wit_.

From the point of view of the reformation of the stage it must be
confessed that _Woman’s Wit_ was not of great importance. The moral
tone of the main action is high; at least virtue is rewarded and vice
disgraced, and there are no amours carried on. But the sub-action,
which was later transformed into _The School Boy_, is entirely opposed
to both good taste and good morals, and after a series of low comedy
scenes, ends with the promise of Young Rakish to Master Johnny that he
will take Johnny to the playhouse, where the latter may satisfy his
disappointment in the failure to marry his mother’s woman. Although
notable progress in the morality of the drama had been made, as we
have seen, the fact that this sub-action was successfully presented by
itself shows that the taste of the theatre-going public was not yet
entirely regenerate.

_Love Makes a Man_ (1701) is a rather close adaptation of two of
Beaumont and Fletcher’s plays,[78] in which Cibber does not pretend
to any serious purpose. “For masks, we’ve scandal, and for beaus,
French airs.” And yet his moralizing and sentimental tendency cannot
be entirely restrained, for when Carlos, the hero of the play, does
turn from his books to love, he speaks in a most heightened and
sentimental strain. So too the efforts of Louisa to seduce him are met
with sentiments of lofty morality which are actuated by his sincere
love for Angelina. The Restoration lover would not have hesitated
in the slightest degree to enjoy all that Louisa offered and his
wife-to-be would have taken it as a matter of course, probably would
have joked with her confidante, if not with the hero, on the subject.
But with Cibber not only is the attitude concerning this sort of thing
changed, but in his alteration he has omitted one incident[79] that
would have been a source of great delight to a Restoration audience,
and has softened the language throughout, so that the coarseness
which marks his original has largely disappeared. No one undergoes
a moral reformation, for Louisa has not been evil in her life, and
this one unsuccessful effort at seduction cures her. But the play has
two characteristics of the sentimental type; it is perfectly moral in
action, and it has some expression of sentimental philosophy.

_She Would and She Would Not_ (1702) is probably more in accordance
with modern taste than any other play Cibber wrote. In this regard for
good taste as well as good morals it is significant of the change in
English comedy, and though it is not sentimental, it indicates Cibber’s
readiness to adopt and lead the new mode. In its technique it reminds
us of the Spanish intrigue plays of Dryden; but it is perfectly moral,
and the two lovers do not employ their time, when away from the main
business of winning their wives, in carrying on intrigues with other
women.

_The Careless Husband_ (acted 1704) is Cibber’s masterpiece in
sentimental comedy. In it he has reached greater excellence than in his
former plays in plot and in character presentation, and in the ability
to make his plot and moral purpose work out consistently and logically.
The reformation of Loveless in _Love’s Last Shift_ strikes one as
not in keeping with his character; one feels that his relapse[80] is
quite the natural thing to happen. In this play, however, the hero’s
character is presented from the first in a way that prepares one for
the final reformation. In this particular Cibber rises above his
contemporaries in comedy.

In _The Careless Husband_ Cibber lays claim to deliberate and
serious moral purpose and deals, as he did in his first play, with
the reclaiming of a licentious husband by a virtuous wife. Dibdin
extravagantly says of it that “it was a school for elegant manners, and
an example for honorable actions.” Cibber expresses himself in regard
to his purpose, in the dedication, as follows:

  “The best criticks have long and justly complain’d, that the
  coarseness of most characters in our late Comedies, have been unfit
  entertainments for People of Quality, especially the ladies: and
  therfore I was long in hopes that some able pen (whose expectation
  did not hang upon the profits of success) wou’d generously attempt
  to reform the Town into a better taste than the World generally
  allows ’em: but nothing of that kind having lately appear’d, that
  would give me the opportunity of being wise at another’s expence, I
  found it impossible any longer to resist the secret temptation of my
  vanity, and so e’en struck the first blow myself: and the event has
  now convinc’d me, that whoever sticks closely to Nature, can’t easily
  write above the understandings of the Galleries, tho’ at the same
  time he may possibly deserve applause of the Boxes.”

But in _The Careless Husband_, in contrast with what he had previously
written in this field, the tone of the entire play is moral, not merely
that of the fifth act, the play is worked out consistently, and the
offensive effect of an incongruous mixture of standards is lacking.
It belongs distinctly to the sentimental type, and is the best of the
early school.

In the prologue Cibber gives a summary of the kind of characters that
should illustrate the moral the comedy writer has as his theme:

    “Of all the various Vices of the Age,
     And shoals of fools expos’d upon the Stage,
     How few are lasht that call for Satire’s rage!
     What can you think to see our Plays so full
     Of Madmen, Coxcombs, and the drivelling Fool?
     Of Cits, of Sharpers, Rakes, and roaring Bullies,
     Of Cheats, of Cuckolds, Aldermen and Cullies?
     Wou’d not one swear, ’twere taken for a rule,
     That Satire’s rod in the Dramatick School,
     Was only meant for the incorrigible Fool?
     As if too Vice and Folly were confined
     To the vile scum alone of human kind,
     Creatures a Muse should scorn; such abject trash
     Deserves not Satire’s but the Hangman’s lash.

           *       *       *       *       *

     We rather think the persons fit for Plays,
     Are those whose birth and education says
     They’ve every help that shou’d improve mankind,
     Yet still live slaves to a vile tainted mind.”

In this play Cibber continues the general practice of basing dramatic
technique upon that of the Restoration drama. We find the same
multiplicity of plots, though there is here a material reduction in
their number. But here the various plots are more consistently bound
together and more logically worked out. The hero is a somewhat refined
Restoration character; he has more gentleness and goodness in him, but
the course he pursues is typical of the earlier plays in that he is
carrying on two amours during the play and at the end he abandons those
intrigues; with this difference, however, that the reformation of the
hero of _The Careless Husband_ is felt to be permanent.

The love story of Lord Morelove and Lady Betty, which forms the
sub-action, is in the best style of the comedy of manners. It, as well
as the main action, reminds one in its finished workmanship of the best
plays written during the latter part of the preceding century.

There is a distinct effort to teach the advantage of moral living, in
the unhappy outcome of the illicit affairs and in the happy outcome
of the legitimate. The situation in which Edging and Sir Charles are
discovered asleep, which proved too gross for Cibber’s audience, is
nevertheless handled in a manner to show disapproval; the Restoration
dramatist would have been salacious and humorous. Sir Charles’s feeling
of guilt after this scene, however, is an entirely new note.

Some of the characters are stock figures. Lady Betty is the usual
coquette, is a Millamant type, but is altogether more human and modern;
Lord Foppington is the continuation of Sir Novelty Fashion, whom we
recognize as a type which appears in Etherege and Crowne; and Sir
Charles, until his reformation, is, in his conduct, the Restoration
rake, with, however, distinctly more humanity. His whole-heartedness
and inherent honor make one forgive his lapse in conduct.

Other characters indicate a new mode. Lady Easy is a modest, virtuous,
capable wife, full of moderation and tact, with the gentleness of
the modern ideal woman. She belongs to the patient Griselda type,
and her situation, which contains not a little pathos, is handled
in a way to gain the sympathy of the audience. This is a new and
noteworthy contribution in the direction of the fully developed type
of sentimental comedy. Even in spite of Sir Charles’s defection in
conduct, we recognize an inherent goodness in his nature. Lord Morelove
is the preaching, sentimentalizing type, serious minded and upright,
the sort of character that Cibber has presented in Lord Lovemore in
_Woman’s Wit_ and Elder Worthy in _Love’s Last Shift_; a character
who seldom appears in the Restoration period, or, if he does appear,
is ridiculed. In this presentation of a successful lover, lacking in
wit and inconstancy, Cibber was not following the convention of the
preceding drama, which usually made its heroes witty scamps.

While we still have light banter and raillery, they are primarily
used to display character or further the plot, functions which they
disregard in the Restoration plays. The theme and its working out
not only deal with the reformation of the loose character, but also
endeavor to present an admirable example of womanhood who shows a
proper fidelity to her husband in spite of all his delinquencies. In
the presentation of this high type of character Cibber has again become
an innovator and has made a positive contribution to the drama of the
period.

In his adaptation of the plays by Dryden[81] in _The Comical Lovers_
(1707) Cibber has not attempted any changes, and the play is of no
importance in the development of comedy. It was regarded merely as a
revival of Dryden’s work, and was acted along with other old plays
during the same season, largely because of an antiquarian interest.

The two plays from which this is made go well together and present
something of the best that Dryden did in the line of satiric comedy,
and no doubt the social satire was almost as pertinent in Cibber’s time
as it had been forty or fifty years earlier.

But the moral standard, which is almost always present, even if in the
background, in Cibber’s own plays, is almost entirely lacking here.
Celadon expects to be cuckolded, but would rather be cuckolded by
Florimel (who reminds one very strongly of Congreve’s Millamant even
in the stipulations before their agreement of marriage), than by any
one else. So too in the complications in the second story in the play,
the moral defections are humorous merely because they are immoral, and
there is no disapproval expressed or implied. In Cibber’s own work he
may retain his disapproval until the last act, but the moral standard
always appears in some way or other, so that this play is essentially
uncharacteristic of Cibber’s work.

_The Double Gallant_ (1707) is an adaption of the same sort as _The
Comical Lovers_, derived from Restoration plays,[82] but it does have
more significance. It is marked by the same general tone of moral
irresponsibility and lightness, but without the actual culmination of
delinquencies; there is the same raillery, somewhat curtailed, and the
hero, as in those plays, involves himself in intrigue with several
women at once. There is more respect for morals in the general conduct
of the piece. The change is indicated in the handling of the source.
Burnaby[83] has made use of what is probably the most notorious and
grossest incident in Restoration comedy, Horner’s subterfuge in _The
Country Wife_, but has modified some of the elements of the intrigue.
Cibber has prevented the successful outcome of the intrigue, and has
entirely omitted the unpleasant features.

_The Lady’s Last Stake_ (1707), in the handling of a serious theme,
seems the most modern of Cibber’s comedies; it represents almost an
approach to the modern problem play in the Lord and Lady Wronglove
story and in the theme of the Lord George and Lady Gentle story. It
is a fully developed comedy of the sentimental type of this period,
with its four acts of intrigue, its reconciliation at the end, and its
extremely moral teaching. Cibber makes two statements of his theme,
first in the dedication, and then in the prologue. His statement in the
dedication is as follows:

  “A Play, without a just Moral, is a poor and trivial Undertaking;
  and ’tis from the Success of such Pieces, that Mr. Collier was
  furnish’d with an advantageous Pretence of laying his unmerciful
  Axe to the Root of the Stage. Gaming is a Vice that has undone more
  innocent Principles than any one Folly that’s in Fashion; therefore
  I chose to expose it to the Fair Sex in its most hideous Form, by
  reducing a Woman of honour to stand the presumptuous Addresses of a
  Man, whom neither her Virtue nor Inclination would let her have the
  least Taste to. Now ’tis not impossible but some Man of Fortune, who
  has a handsome Lady, and a great deal of Money to throw away, may,
  from this startling hint, think it worth his while to find his Wife
  some less hazardous Diversion. If that should ever happen, my end of
  writing this Play is answer’d.”

The plot centers around a most lively intrigue, but shows a departure
from the Restoration type. Cibber seems to have devised his own plot
from observation rather than to have taken it from the work of some one
else, though in his characters he shows some imitation of characters
in older plays. Miss Notable is a Miss Prue type, but the action of
the play preserves her virtue and indicates disapproval of the effort
to seduce her. There is a wide difference between this and the course
of Congreve’s character who rushes eagerly to her bedroom followed by
Tattle.[84] So too in the relations of Lady Wronglove with her husband
there enters a new note. Not only does Cibber show her a virtuous
woman, but he recognizes the infidelity of the husband as grave enough
to merit not only condemnation but punishment; and though he does
not carry his story so far as to inflict on him his just deserts, he
recognizes the right of the wife to resent Lord Wronglove’s action,
although he clearly feels her resentment is unwise. Sir Friendly
Moral, who reconciles the various couples, furnishes the somewhat
sentimental moralizings, and seems to be the mouthpiece of the author.

One does not waste much sympathy on either Lord or Lady Wronglove in
their bickerings, and their reconciliation at the end through the good
offices of Sir Friendly is decidedly lacking in probability, in view of
the way in which they have been previously presented. This dénouement
is brought about by a typical _deus ex machina_ device, in which Sir
Friendly, by supplying money to one of the characters, and by using
his exceeding wisdom and knowledge with another set of characters,
brings about the happy ending. Cibber was not unlike the other late
seventeenth and early eighteenth century writers in his inability to
bring his plays to a logical and probable conclusion. He was hampered
by his theory that the element of surprise should enter into the happy
ending, and hence he often seems to feel compelled to introduce a new
force very late in the play.

The characters in the main action are somewhat serious and lacking
in attractiveness. But those in the comic action, Lord George, Mrs.
Conquest, and Miss Notable, are much more lively sources of interest.
Miss Notable, as already stated, is a Miss Prue type, though she is
probably not to be described as a “silly, awkward country girl.” She is
essentially a sophisticated city miss, but her desires and ambitions,
as well as some of her ingenuous characteristics, are similar to those
of the Miss Prue type. She starts a flirtation with each new man she
meets in order to pique the last new man, who in like manner had his
turn. The discomfiture of Lord George when Miss Notable avows her love
for Mrs. Conquest, who is in the disguise of a man, is very clever.

It is hard to believe that an honorable gentleman, as Sir George is
described as being, would cheat at cards even for the purpose of
seducing another man’s wife. It is in just such conceptions as this
that Cibber’s superficiality is shown, a superficiality which prevented
him from writing great drama notwithstanding his knowledge of technical
requirements.

In the situations of Lady Gentle and Mrs. Conquest, especially in that
of the latter, there is a distinct element of pathos, similar to that
in _The Careless Husband_. As in _The Careless Husband_, this pathos
is due not merely to the situation, but depends likewise on the nature
of the persons presented. In this respect it is superior to the later
sentimental comedy, in which the pathos depends more largely on the
situation alone.

In its serious elements _The Lady’s Last Stake_ attacks what are
without doubt notable human failings, and the dialogue at its best
reminds us of some of the best Congrevian sort. But Cibber’s practice
as to the happy outcome and his theory that there must be a surprise at
the end of a play, have prevented what might have been, in the hands of
a more serious and larger minded dramatist, a most important handling
of a new theme in a new way.

When he wrote _The Rival Fools_ (1709), Cibber seemed, if one may judge
from the prologue, to feel that his efforts for reform were not meeting
with sufficient response and appreciation, and therefore tells the
audience that

    “All sorts of Men and Manners may
     From these last Scenes go unreprov’d away.
     From late Experience taught, we slight th’ old Rule
     Of Profit with Delight: This Play’s--All Fool.”

But though this comedy is not didactic in its purpose, it is morally
clean in its action.

In _The Non-Juror_ (1717), a play written with an avowedly political
purpose, he cannot avoid moralizing and sentimentality, qualities which
appear slightly in the story of Charles, and in the relations of Dr.
Wolf to Lady Woodvil and Maria. It cannot be claimed that the play has
any important bearing on sentimental comedy, however.

_The Refusal_ (1721) might be called a purified Restoration comedy,
without any positive bearing on the sentimentalizing tendency except
that it shows the tendency to make the drama more moral.

_The Provoked Husband_ (1728), Cibber’s completion of Vanbrugh’s _A
Journey to London_, is typically sentimental in treatment, with the
happy ending, the reformation of the vicious, and the true but dull
expression of moral sentiments by the serious characters. In it Cibber
has departed from Vanbrugh’s original intention by reforming the wife,
whom he has preserved as perfectly true to her husband, though unduly
given to gambling. In the love affair of Mr. Manly and Lord Townley’s
sister we likewise have sentimental treatment, and in the expression of
pious thoughts no one could be more prolific than Mr. Manly. In this
play Cibber does not strike any note he has not used before; it is
merely significant of the permanence of the changed manner of writing
in English comedy generally.

In the first plot Cibber has somewhat softened the characters of
Vanbrugh’s Lord and Lady Loverule in Lord and Lady Townley, giving to
the husband a much less dictatorial and more sentimental and uxorious
character. Lady Townley, though she does not show any signs of softer
qualities, is made to see the error of her course of late hours and
gambling, and undergoes a somewhat improbable but characteristic
conversion. Cibber tells us[85] that it had been Vanbrugh’s intention
to turn the lady out of doors, as would have been natural and logical,
giving to the play a serious interest which it lacks under Cibber’s
management.

The characters are shorn of their rough virility in Cibber’s
version. Squire Richard is a sort of rough study of the Tony Lumpkin
type,--without his wit, however,--but the credit of the portrayal is
due to Vanbrugh rather than to Cibber.

While the play is far from lacking in interest and power to amuse,
there is a very decided inferiority to Vanbrugh’s play, even in its
unfinished and imperfect state. Cibber’s play is a typical sentimental
comedy, with its undeserved happy ending, reformation of the vicious,
and commonplace expression of sentiment and morals on the part of the
serious characters.

Although it does not exhibit any startling new qualities, in its theme
attacking the evils of gambling which Cibber has previously attacked,
the play is a good example of eighteenth century comedy; fully as good,
indeed, as the work of the other dramatists of the time, but suffering
in comparison with Cibber’s own best work.

It may be interesting to note that Cibber is said to have added the
parts of Tom and Phillis to Steele’s _Conscious Lovers_.[86] When
Steele submitted this play to him, Cibber felt that it would not
satisfy the desire of an audience to laugh at a comedy. According
to the account in _The Lives of the Poets_, Steele gladly accepted
Cibber’s suggestion that a comic action be inserted and even proposed
that Cibber make such additions to the play as he saw fit. The absence
of humor is a mark of the form of sentimental comedy inaugurated by
Steele, while the form represented by Cibber’s work is closer to the
Restoration type, is indeed really a modification of that type, and
the element of humor is consequently found in it.


8. TYPICAL QUALITY OF CIBBER’S WORK.

Cibber’s work typifies the change that was going on in the moral
reformation of the drama, as it likewise shows the development
characteristic of the time in other elements of the drama.[87] In
him, as in others, we see that while the general type of Restoration
comedy was adopted in the construction of the plot, there was a
tendency to simplify the plot. Moreover, Cibber further departed from
the Restoration type by the selection of themes other than mere sex
relations. Other dramatists were able to present such themes without
reference to moral degeneration, but Cibber, when he takes such a
subject as the dangers of gambling, for instance, cannot entirely avoid
dealing with sex immorality.

In the dull, chaste lover, the sober, moral, worthy gentleman who is
largely a result of the sentimental tendency in the drama, such as Lord
Morelove in _Woman’s Wit_ and Elder Worthy in _Love’s Last Shift_,
Cibber developed and made more important a type which had appeared but
had been relatively unimportant in earlier drama. In the comedy of
Steele and his followers this character was further developed so that
it became the central figure. Cibber and his predecessors seem to have
been guided by some such formula as that interesting personality and
morality appear in inverse ratio in male characters.

The precocious Miss Prue type, the young woman who is destined to have
a lover or a husband, perhaps both, in a short time, is represented by
Miss Jenny in _The Provoked Husband_ _and_ Miss Notable in _The Lady’s
Last Stake_. This type of character soon disappeared from the drama, as
did likewise the Millamant kind of coquette, who appears as Maria in
_The Non-Juror_ and as Lady Betty in _The Careless Husband_. Snap and
Trappanti are typical menservants, witty and graceless, and we find the
mercenary serving woman in _The Provoked Husband_ and _She Would and
She Would Not_. Characters of this type continue occasionally in the
succeeding drama, where they furnish the comic relief.


9. GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF CIBBER’S COMEDIES.

Cibber’s themes are taken from contemporary life and its more obvious
problems. Of course so far as any serious purpose is concerned, a
distinction must be made between those plays designed merely to afford
the pleasure of an evening’s entertainment and those written with more
serious intent. Cibber often distinguishes between these two classes,
and frankly states his purpose in the prologue or dedication to the
separate plays.

His attitude toward his audience is somewhat naïve. He frankly states
that his “sole dependence being the judgment of an audience, ’twere
madness to provoke them.”[88] He again says[89] that “every guest is a
judge of his own palate; and a poet ought no more to impose good sense
upon the galleries, than dull farce upon undisputed judges. I first
considered who my guests were, before I prepared my entertainment.”
This would seem to indicate that at times he had no high respect for
his audiences; especially when he wrote _The School Boy_ and _Hob in
the Well_, if the latter is by him. In this connection one may note
that he consciously distinguished stage and closet drama, and made
no attempt to write the latter. In his “Remarks to the Reader” of
_Ximena_ he says, “though the reader must be charmed by the tenderness
of the characters in the original, I have ventured to alter, to make
them more agreeable to the spectator.” These statements would seem to
indicate that Cibber wrote his sentimental plays because he thought the
audiences desired something of the sort.

As a playwright Cibber was a strong upholder of religion and the
established church. He points out that the only religious sect to close
the theatre was also opposed to the established church.[90] But in
treating religious subjects he does not use the Puritans for dramatic
material, for they were no longer a political menace, but he turns to
the Roman Catholics, whose activities were not merely religious, but
political. In _The Non-Juror_ we have a play almost entirely built on
anti-Catholic feeling; in _King John_ we have another attack on the
Church of Rome; and in the fourth act of _Woman’s Wit_ we again have
satire, but in this case primarily of the Catholic clergy, rather than
the church itself. We do not have any references to party politics,
aside from this Catholic problem.

His original plays in comedy, other than farces and operas, deal with
moral problems. In the case of _Love’s Last Shift_ and _The Careless
Husband_ we have presented the reformation of husbands not yet entirely
spoiled at heart; in _The Provoked Husband_ the reformation of a wife
who has not committed any serious breach of the moral code; and in this
last, as well as in _The Lady’s Last Stake_, we have plays dealing with
the evils resulting from women’s gambling. It is curious to find one
who was so notorious a gambler as Cibber choosing such a theme.

The language shows great change from that of the Restoration in regard
to moral refinement. Cibber’s plays become less and less coarse in
speech. His earlier plays have a grossness almost equal to that of
Restoration comedy, but gradually grow purer. This change in the
language is found in English comedy generally, and as it progresses a
new element enters, the expression of moral sentiments, extravagantly
and artificially stated. This last shows a gradual increase, reaching
its height in the later sentimental comedy of the middle of the century.

Merely as literature, three of Cibber’s plays, at least, are well worth
while: _The Careless Husband_, _She Would and She Would Not_, and
_The Non-Juror_. They lack the briskness and sureness of touch that
characterized Congreve, but compare most favorably with the work of men
in the next rank, and are not only delightful and profitable reading,
but are thoroughly representative of the period in which they appear.
Grouped with these as possessing permanent literary value are the
_Apology_ and not more than half a dozen songs. Outside of these three
plays, one prose work, and a few songs, Cibber produced nothing that
is worth preserving because of its merit as literature. His greatest
importance to the student of literary history lies in his contribution
to the development of sentimental comedy.


10. PLACE OF STEELE IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF SENTIMENTAL COMEDY.

In view of the place that is always given to Steele as the originator
of sentimental comedy, a discussion of any phase of the subject would
be incomplete without at least a reference to his relation to the
particular question under discussion. We may grant that Cibber does
not represent the culmination of the sentimental type: that is to be
found in Steele’s _Conscious Lovers_ (1722). He is, rather, the most
prominent figure in the first stage of the development of sentimental
comedy, during which the Restoration type was transformed by the
addition of a moral purpose, by the purification of the language, and
by the addition of the pathetic element; so that the new form in his
hands has much of the old as well as the new, while Steele’s _Conscious
Lovers_ has almost entirely broken away from the old and looks forward.
But the movement in which Cibber was so prominent a figure did make the
way possible and contributed the most important elements which later
developed in the hands of Steele and his followers.

A commonplace of literary history is that it was Steele who purged
English comedy of its vileness and was the first to write sentimental
comedy. This, as we have seen, is not true; for though _The Conscious
Lovers_ is probably the best of its type, it merely lays more stress
upon the pathetic element and carries forward another step the sort of
thing that Cibber had done in such comedies as _The Careless Husband_
and _The Lady’s Last Stake_, which are as truly sentimental comedies
as this, and which possess the pathetic interest, but in a less marked
degree. In Steele’s other plays, _The Funeral_ (1701), _The Lying
Lover_ (1705), _The Tender Husband_ (1705), Steele, except in the
matter of the purity of the language, does not show as fully developed
examples of the type as does Cibber in his work of the same period and
earlier.

Steele’s first play to be acted, _The Funeral_, lacks sentimental
quality; it is merely a comedy which, when compared to the Restoration
type, has a higher moral tone. Steele had no higher motive, he tells
us, in writing this play than the purpose of reinstating himself in
the opinion of his fellow soldiers who had ostracized him as a moral
prig after the appearance of _The Christian Hero_ (1701). In his
preface he mentions two themes as those around which the comedy is
written, namely, the practices of undertakers and “legal villanies.”
Lady Brumpton, who had bigamously married Lord Brumpton, is discredited
by being ejected from Lord Brumpton’s household, but there is no
suggestion that she is in any way reformed, and in the rest of the
action none of the other elements of sentimental comedy are prominent.

_The Lying Lover_ goes a little further and reforms the hero at the
end, as is done in the comedies of Cibber. But even this similarity
is only superficial, for the hero is not really vicious, being guilty
only of some entertaining lying, and the reformation is brought about,
not by approved sentimental feminine means, but by the fact that the
hero finds himself in prison. But even though the hero is humiliated
by temporary imprisonment, his delinquencies are so diverting that the
reader is entirely in sympathy with him. Our sympathy for him, indeed,
is so great that it is a distinct disappointment that the lady is given
to the honest and jealous lover instead of to him. Steele lays no
claim to originality in the reform, “compunction and remorse” of his
hero, for in his preface he says that such things had been “frequently
applauded on the stage.” Nor is the versifying of the elevated portions
of the play a new thing; it is found both earlier and later than
sentimental comedy and is not a distinctive mark of that type.

_The Tender Husband_ was indebted to Cibber’s _Careless Husband_,
which had recently appeared, but is not to be compared to it in
its sentimental qualities. In both plays, however, we have the
reconciliation of an estranged husband and wife. In Cibber it is the
husband who is the offender, and he is recalled from his vices by
the patient fidelity of his wife; a reformation based on sentiment.
In _The Tender Husband_, the wife is reformed from extravagance in
her expenditure of time and money on trivialities, and from failure
in her duty to her husband, but the reformation is brought about by
a mere trick that the husband plays upon the wife rather than by the
interaction of personality on personality. Steele shows nothing of the
serious grasp of the situation that Cibber shows in his play on the
same theme, _The Provoked Husband_. Steele’s handling is distinctly
less artistic and distinctly less sentimental than in either of
Cibber’s plays. This is seen also in Steele’s light treatment of the
wife’s equivocal action toward Fainlove, whom she mistakenly supposes
to be a man, and toward whom she makes questionable advances. Not only
in regard to such situations as this, but in the attitude toward actual
breaches of morality, Steele shows a lower standard than Cibber. In
both _The Careless Husband_ and _The Tender Husband_ the hero keeps a
mistress, but while Cibber brings the illicit amour to an end with the
disgrace of the mistress and a distinct moral, Steele not only shows
none of this disapproval but provides the mistress with a husband of
means and gives her a good dowry.

Seventeen years later, though according to Genest[91] the play had been
written some years before it was acted, Steele produced his fully
developed comedy of the sentimental type, _The Conscious Lovers_. It is
entirely different from the preceding plays, for instead of containing
a lively intrigue with clever satire and wit, such as we have in _The
Lying Lover_, the tone throughout is fixed by the pathetic and didactic
elements. Steele rightly felt that he was doing something new, and took
credit to himself in the prologue:

    “But the bold sage--the poet of tonight--
     By new and desperate rules resolved to write.

           *       *       *       *       *

     ’Tis yours with breeding to refine the age,
     To chasten wit, and moralise the stage.”

Not only does this moral and sentimental note appear throughout, but
in Mr. Sealand, especially in his dialogue with Sir John Bevil in
the fourth act, there appears the exaltation of the tradesman class
which culminated in the work of Lillo. Bevil Junior is a pattern
of propriety and goodness, but his lack of virility and brilliance
contrasts him most disadvantageously with the heroes of the preceding
period. He is the dull, chaste lover, the hero of the second intrigue
of the Restoration and Cibber type of comedy, the Lord Morelove sort,
exalted to the first place. Indiana is the patient Griselda type, the
Lady Easy sort of person, but in _The Conscious Lovers_ her gentleness
and goodness are not used to recall the erring, but are presented
merely as desirable qualities for a virtuous young woman to possess.
The witty rake has disappeared. The Wildairs, Lovelesses, Millamants,
and Lady Betties are no more, and in their places are maudlin, sickly
sentimentalists, whose goodness and sufferings are all that commend
them. Parson Adams was right, it does contain “some things almost
solemn enough for a sermon.”

This sentimental didacticism becomes still more conspicious in the
work of Holcroft and his school, whose plays are rendered degenerate
and emasculate thereby. If the historians of literature mean that
Steele was the originator of this type, whose essential characteristic
is the centering of the action around a pathetic situation, they are
probably right; but any statement that it was he who introduced the
sentimental or pathetic element into English comedy, or that he began
the reformation of the drama in the direction of morality, is easily
seen to be false by a comparison of his work with the earlier and
contemporary work of Cibber.




BIBLIOGRAPHY


1. CIBBER’S WORKS.


_Prose._

    An Apology for the Life of Colley Cibber, Comedian, and Late
  Patentee of the Theatre-Royal. With an Historical View of the Stage
  during his Own Time. Written by Himself. London, 1740. (I have used
  the fourth edition, London, 1756. Best edition is that of Lowe,
  London, 1889.)

    A Letter from Mr. Cibber, to Mr. Pope, Inquiring into the Motives
  that might induce him in his Satyrical Works, to be so frequently
  fond of Mr. Cibber’s Name. London, 1742.

    The Egoist: or, Colley upon Cibber. Being his own Picture
  Retouch’d, to so plain a Likeness, that no One, now, would have the
  Face to own it, but Himself. London, 1743.

    Another Occasional Letter from Mr. Cibber to Mr. Pope. Wherein the
  New Hero’s Preferment to his Throne, in the _Dunciad_, seems not to
  be Accepted. And the Author of that Poem His more rightful Claim to
  it, is Asserted. With an Expostulatory Address to the Reverend Mr. W.
  W............n, Author of the new Preface, and Adviser in the curious
  Improvements of that Satire. By Mr. Colley Cibber. London, 1744.

    The Character and Conduct of Cicero, Considered from the History of
  his Life by the Reverend Dr. Middleton. With Occasional Essays and
  Observations upon the most memorable Facts and Persons during that
  Period. London, 1747.

    The Lady’s Lecture, a Theatrical Dialogue, between Sir Charles Easy
  and his Marriageable Daughter. Being an Attempt to Engage Obedience
  by Filial Liberty: and to Give the Maiden Conduct of Virtue,
  Chearfulness. By C. Cibber, Esq: Servant to his Majesty. London, 1748.


_Non-Dramatic Poetry._

    Gentleman’s Magazine. London, 1731--

    London Magazine. London, 1732--

    A Rhapsody on the Marvellous: Arising from the First Odes of Horace
  and Pindar. Being a Scrutiny into Ancient Poetical Fame, demanded by
  Modern Common Sense. By Colley Cibber, Esq. P. L.

    Fame then was cheap, and the first comer sped:
    Which they have since preserved by being dead. Dryden.
    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   liberius si
    Dixero quid, si forte jocosius, hoc mihi juris
    Cum venia dabis. Hor. Sat. 4. L 1. London, 1751.


_Dramatic Works._

  (_Arranged in the order of stage presentation. The dates are those of
  publication._)

    Collected editions of his Plays appeared in 1721, in two volumes;
  in 1636, in five volumes; in 1760, in four volumes; in 1777, in five
  volumes. The last named is the edition I have used.

    Love’s Last Shift; or, The Fool in Fashion. 1696.

    Woman’s Wit; or, The Lady in Fashion. 1697.

    Xerxes. 1699.

    The Tragical History of Richard III, altered from Shakespear. 1700.

    Love Makes a Man; or, The Fop’s Fortune. 1701.

    She Would and She Would Not; or, The Kind Impostor. 1703.

    The Careless Husband. 1705.

    Perolla and Izadora. 1706.

    The Comical Lovers. 1707.

    The School Boy; or, The Comical Rival. 1707.

    The Double Gallant; or, The Sick Lady’s Cure. 1707.

    The Lady’s Last Stake; or, The Wife’s Resentment. 1708.

    The Rival Fools. 1709.

    The Rival Queans, with the Humours of Alexander the Great, a
  Comical-tragedy. Dublin, 1729.

    Ximena; or, The Heroick Daughter. 1718.

    Cinna’s Conspiracy. 1713.

    Venus and Adonis. A Masque. 1715.

    Myrtillo, a Pastoral Interlude. 1716.

    The Non-Juror. 1718.

    The Refusal; or, The Ladies Philosophy. 1721.

    Caesar in Aegypt. 1725.

    The Provok’d Husband; or, A Journey to London. 1728.

    Love in a Riddle. A Pastoral. 1729 [misprinted 1719].

    Damon and Phillida; a Ballad Opera. 1729.

    Papal Tyranny in the Reign of King John. 1745.


2. GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY.

  Actor, The, or, A Treatise on the Art of Playing. London, 1750.

  Age of Dullness, The, a Satire. By a Natural Son of Mr. Pope. London,
    1757.

  Baker, D. E., I. Reed and S. Jones. Biographica Dramatica. London,
    1812.

  Beaumont and Fletcher. Works. London, 1843.

  Besser, R. Colley Cibbers The Double Gallant und seine Quellen.
    Halle, 1903.

  Betterton, T. The History of the English Stage, from the Restoration
    to the Present Time. London, 1741.

  Betterton, Thomas, Life and Times of. Reprint, London, 1888.

  Blast upon Bays, A; or, A New Lick at the Laureat. London, 1742.

  Booth, Barton, Life of. London, 1733.

  Boyle, Roger, Earl of Orrery. Parthenissa. London, 1676.

  British Theatre, The. London. 1750.

  Brown, Hawkins. A Pipe of Tobacco. London, 1744.

  Burnaby, C. The Reformed Wife. London, 1700.

  Burnaby, C. The Ladies Visiting Day. London, 1701.

  Canfield, Dorothea Frances. Corneille and Racine in England. New
    York, 1904.

  Carlile, J. The Fortune Hunters; or, Two Fools Well Met. London, 1689.

  Case of the Present Theatrical Dispute Fairly Stated, The. London,
    1743.

  Centlivre, Susanna. Dramatic Works. Reprint, London, 1872.

  Charke, Charlotte. A Narrative of the Life of Mrs. Charlotte Charke.
    Written by Herself. London, 1755; reprint, London, 1827.

  Chetwood, W. R. General History of the Stage. London, 1749.

  Cibber, Theophilus, editor. Lives of the Poets of Great Britain and
    Ireland. London, 1753.

  Cibber, Theophilus. Two Dissertations on the Theatres. London, 1756.

  Corneille, Pierre. Oeuvres. Paris, 1862.

  Crowne, John. Dramatic Works, in _Dramatists of the Restoration_, ed.
    by Maidment and Logan. Edinburgh, 1873.

  Davies, T. Dramatic Miscellanies. London, 1784.

  Davies, T. Memoirs of the Life of David Garrick, Esq. Third ed.,
    London, 1781.

  Difference between Verbal and Practical Virtue, The. London, 1742.

  Dogget, T. The Country Wake. London, 1696.

  Dohse, R. Colley Cibbers Bühnenbearbeitung von Shakespeares Richard
    III. Bonn, 1897.

  Doran, J. Their Majesties’ Servants. London, 1888.

  Downes, J. Roscius Anglicanus. London, 1708; reprint, London, 1886.

  Dryden, John. Works. London, 1889.

  Egerton, T. and J. The Theatrical Remembrancer. London, 1788.

  Fielding, Henry. Historical Register for 1736. Works, London, 1852.

  Fielding, Henry (?). An Apology for the Life of Mr. T.... C....
    London, 1740.

  Genest, J. Some Account of the English Stage from the Restoration in
    1660 to 1830. Bath, 1832.

  Granger, J. Biographical History of England. London, 1779-1806.

  Hermann, A. Colley Cibbers Tragicomedy Ximena und ihr Verhältniss zu
    Corneilles Cid. Kiel, 1908.

  Hutton, Laurence. Literary Landmarks of London. Boston, 1885.

  Jacob, G. The Poetical Register. London, 1719-1723.

  Johnson, T. Tryal of Colley Cibber for Writing a Book Intitled An
    Apology for his Life. London, 1740.

  Kilbourne, F. W. Alterations and Adaptations of Shakespeare. Boston,
    1906.

  Köppe, K. Das Verhältniss von Cibbers Papal Tyranny zu Shakespeares
    King John. Halle, 1902.

  Krüger, W. Das Verhältniss von Colley Cibbers Lustspiel The Comical
    Lovers zu J. Drydens Marriage à la Mode und Secret Love. Halle,
    1902.

  Laureat, The; or, The Right Side of Colley Cibber, Esq. To Which is
    Added, The History of the Life, Manners and Writings of Aesopus the
    Tragedian. London, 1740.

  Learned, J. The Counterfeits. London, 1679.

  Lee, W. L. M. History of Police in England. London, 1901.

  Letter to Mr. C....b....r, A, on his Letter to Mr. P........ London,
    1742.

  Lounsbury, Thomas R. Shakespeare as a Dramatic Artist. New York, 1901.

  Lowe, R. W. A Bibliographical Account of English Theatrical
    Literature. London, 1888.

  Macaulay, T. B. History of England. Boston, 1900.

  Man of Taste, The. London, 1733.

  Marks, Jeannette. The English Pastoral Drama. London, 1908.

  Medbourne, M. Tartuffe. London, 1670.

  Michels, E. Quellenstudien zu Colley Cibbers Lustspiel The Careless
    Husband. Marburg, 1908.

  Miles, D. H. The Influence of Molière on Restoration Comedy. New
    York, 1910.

  Molière. Oeuvres. Paris, 1873-1900.

  Molière. Dramatic Works, translated by H. Van Laun. Edinburgh, 1878.

  Molloy, J. F. Famous Plays. London, 1886.

  Mountfort, W. Greenwich Park, a Comedy. London, n. d. [1691].

  New Theatrical Dictionary. London, 1742.

  Nichols, J. Illustrations of the Literary History of the Eighteenth
    Century. London, 1817.

  Nichols, J. Literary Anecdotes of the Eighteenth Century. London,
    1815.

  Ost, G. Das Verhältniss von Cibbers Lustspiel Love Makes a Man zu
    Fletchers Dramen, The Elder Brother und The Custom of the Country.

  Pepys, Samuel. Diary. London, 1897.

  Philips, Katherine. Poems. London, 1669.

  Pilkington, L. Memoirs. London, 1748.

  Quin, Mr. James, Comedian, Life of. London, 1766; reprint, 1887.

  Rowe, N. Pharsalia. London, 1718.

  Sanger, W. W. History of Prostitution. New York, 1899.

  Schneider, W. Das Verhältniss von Colley Cibbers Lustspiel The
    Non-Juror zu Malias Tartuffe. Halle, 1903.

  Shakspere, William. Richard III, Variorum edition, ed. by H. H.
    Furness, Jr. Philadelphia, 1908.

  Steele, Richard, and John Dennis. The Theatre, by Sir Richard Steele;
    to which are added, the Anti-Theatre; the Character of Sir John
    Edgar; Steele’s Case with the Lord Chamberlain. Illustrated with
    Literary and Historical Anecdotes by John Nichols. London, 1791.

  Stone, E. Chronicles of Fashion. London, 1845.

  Stoye, M. Das Verhältniss von Cibbers Tragödie Caesar in Egypt zu
    Fletchers The False One. Halle, 1897.

  Strickland, Agnes. Queens of England. New York, 1851.

  Temple of Dullness, The, with the Humours of Signor Capochio and
    Signora Dorinna; A Comic Opera in Two Acts. London, 1745.

  Theatrical Correspondence in Death. An Epistle from Mrs. Oldfield, in
    the Shades, to Mrs. Br. ceg....dle, upon Earth. London, 1743.

  Theobald, L. The Happy Captive, an English Opera, with an Interlude,
    in Two Comick Scenes, betwixt Signor Capochio, a Director from the
    Canary Islands; and Signora Dorinna. London, 1741.

  Thorndike, Ashley H. Tragedy. Boston, 1908.

  To diabebouloumenon; or, The Proceedings at the Theatre Royal in
    Drury Lane. London, 1722.

  Tönse, L. Cibbers Comedy The Refusal in ihrem Verhältniss zu Molières
    les Femmes savantes. Kiel, 1900.

  Traill, H. D. Social England. New York, 1902.

  Vanbrugh, John. Works, ed. by W. C. Ward. London, 1893.

  Victor, B. History of the Theatres of London and Dublin from 1730 to
    the Present Time. London, 1761.

  Waterhouse, O. The Development of Sentimental Comedy in the
    Eighteenth Century, _Anglia_, XXX.

  Whincop, T. Scanderbeg; or, Love and Liberty. London, 1747.

  Wilkes, T. A General View of the Stage. London, 1759.

  Wilks, Robert, Esq., The Life of that Eminent Comedian. London, 1733.

  Woman of Taste. London, 1733

  Wood, A. I. P. Stage History of Shakespeare’s Richard III. New York,
    1909.




FOOTNOTES:

[1] II. 573.

[2] Whincop, _Complete List of All the English Dramatic Poets_, p. 199.
See also the dramatic list appended to the second volume of the fourth
edition of the _Apology_, p. 286.

[3] The sub-plot of _Woman’s Wit_ was likewise acted separately after
the original play had failed on the stage.

[4] Reprint of 1887, p. 28.

[5] Page 28.

[6] _Apology_, I, 180.

[7] III, 325.

[8] The _Advertisement_ prefixed to _The Happy Captive_ says: “The
interlude, which is added in two comic scenes, is entirely new to our
climate; and the success of it is submitted to experiment, and the
taste of the audience.” Only this portion of _The Happy Captive_ was
ever acted.

[9] Theobald died September 18, 1744. _The Temple of Dullness_ was
acted January 17, 1745.

[10] For a history of the pastoral drama in the eighteenth century and
a summary of its qualities, see Jeannette Marks, _The English Pastoral
Drama_, London, 1908.

[11] Thorndike, _Tragedy_, p. 273.

[12] Davies, _Dramatic Miscellanies_, III, 459.

[13] _The Tatler_, Number 42, July 16, 1709.

[14] _Address to the Reader_, prefixed to _Ximena_.

[15] Richard Dohse, _Colley Cibber’s Buehnenarbeitung von Shakspere’s
Richard III_, Bonn, 1899.

[16] Alice I. Perry Wood, _The Stage History of Richard III_, New York,
1909.

[17] The number and sources of the lines as given by Furness. _Variorum
Richard III_, p. 604, are as follows: _Richard II_, 14; _1 Henry IV_,
6; _2 Henry IV_, 20; _Henry V_, 24; _1 Henry VI_, 5; _2 Henry VI_, 17;
_3 Henry VI_, 103; _Richard III_, 795; Cibber, 1069; total, 2053. The
number of lines in the Globe text of Shakspere’s _Richard III_ is 3621.

[18] As “God” to “Heaven,” I, ii, 236; due in this instance to the
Collier influence.

[19] Edition of 1665, pp. 102-157.

[20] _Dedication_ of _Perolla and Izadora_.

[21] Genest, II, 506.

[22] _To the Reader_, _Ximena_.

[23] See Canfield, _Corneille and Racine in England_, p. 169.

[24] Genest, II, 511; and Canfield, _op. cit._, pp. 179 ff.

[25] II, 104.

[26] VIII, 204.

                         “Mr. Cibber.

  1701 Nov.  8 A Third of Love’s Last Shift    3    4    6
  1705 Nov. 14 Perolla and Izadora            36   11    0
  1707 Oct. 27 Double Gallant                 16    2    6
       Nov. 22 Lady’s Last Stake              32    5    0
       Feb. 26 Venus and Adonis                5    7    6
  1708 Oct.  9 Comical Lover                  10   15    0
  1712 Mar. 16 Cinna’s Conspiracy             13    0    0
  1718 Oct.  1 The Nonjuror                  105    0    0

               No price or date.
               Mrytillo, A pastoral,
               Rival Fools,
               Heroic Daughter,
               Wit at Several Weapons.”

[27] Although acted six times it could not be considered extremely
successful. According to Genest, III, 162, Nichols speaks of having
made merry with a party of friends over the pasteboard swans, on the
first night of its production.

[28] III, 161.

[29] _Das Verhaeltniss von Cibber’s Tragoedie Caesar in Egypt zu
Fletcher’s The False One._

[30] _Op. cit._, p. 223.

[31] Cibber no doubt used Rowe’s translation (1710).

[32] Compare, for instance, the general idea of the exposition In Act I.

[33] Lucan ends before this incident, but Rowe continues the narrative,
using the same material as _The False One_.

[34] Genest. IV, 146, says that it had not been acted since 1695,
though he records the performances in 1737 and 1738.

[35] It is to be noted that efforts were made to deprive Cibber of
credit for his work not only in this play but also in _The Non-Juror_
and _The Refusal_.

[36] _The History of the Theatres of London and Dublin_, II, 49.

[37] Davies, _Dramatic Miscellanies_, I, 5. For a characteristic
example of the criticism to which Cibber was subjected, see Fielding’s
_Historical Register for the Year 1736_, Act III.

[38] For full discussion of the relationship between Cibber’s _Richard
III_ and Shakspere’s _Richard III_, see A. I. P. Wood, and Dohse. The
whole subject of Shaksperian alterations is taken up in Lounsbury’s
_Shakspere as a Dramatic Artist_, and in Kilbourne’s _Alterations
and Adaptations of Shakspere_. It is curious that Lounsbury does not
discuss Cibber’s _Richard III_, which is not only the most famous
Shaksperian alteration but the only one of any real value.

[39] The addition of parts from _3 Henry VI_ at the beginning of the
play.

[40] _Tragedy_, VIII and IX.

[41] See especially throughout _Ximena_.

[42] According to _The Life of Aesopus_, this “was said to be a silly
tale collected from some dreaming romance,” but as the writer does not
give the title of this romance and apparently had no knowledge of the
play, his testimony is of no value.

[43] “The furious John Dennis, who hated Cibber for obstructing, as
he imagined, the progress of his tragedy, called _The Invader of His
Country_, in very passionate terms denies his claim to this comedy:
‘When _The Fool in Fashion_ was first acted,’ says the critic, ‘Cibber
was hardly twenty-two years of age; how could he, at the age of twenty,
write a comedy with a just design, distinguished characters, and a
proper dialogue who now, at forty, treats us with Hibernian sense and
Hibernian English?’” Davies, _Dramatic Miscellanies_, III, 410.

[44] Jacob, _Poetical Register_, p. 38, suggests Otway’s _Dare Devil_
(that is, _The Atheist_) as the source of the play, but it would take a
vivid imagination to see the connection.

[45] _Das Verhaeltniss von Cibber’s Lustspiel Love Makes a Man zu
Fletcher’s Dramen The Elder Brother und The Custom of The Country_, p.
82.

[46] It was acted in New York, January 15, 1883, by Miss Ada Rehan,
under the management of Augustin Daly. See Lowe, _Apology_, II, 289.
Genest records, VI, 23, that when it was performed at Covent Garden
in 1778, “the applause was so strong in the second act, that the
performers were obliged to stop for some time.”

[47] This translation of three French novels, whose original source
had been Spanish, was issued again in 1712 as _Three Ingenious Spanish
Novels_. See Chandler, _Romances of Roguery_, New York, 1899, pp.
462-3. These novels are ultimately based on _La Garduna de Sevilla_ of
Castillo Solorzano. It is also to be noticed that the story appears in
_La Villana de Ballecas_ by Tirso de Molina, in _La Ocasion hace al
ladron_, by Moreto, and in the story of Aurora in Le Sage’s _Gil Blas_.
Dunlop, _History of Prose Fiction_, II, 475, states that _She Would
and She Would Not_ is taken from _Gil Blas_. _Gil Blas_ was published
thirteen years later than Cibber’s play.

[48] Wilkes, _General View of the Stage_, p. 40, says that were the
play curtailed of one scene he “would not fail to pronounce it not only
the best comedy in English, but in any other language.”

[49] Boswell’s _Johnson_, edited by G. Birkbeck Hill, London, 1891; I,
201.

[50] Preface to _The Double Gallant_.

[51] II, 173.

[52] _Apology_, I, 243.

[53] III, 209. See also Thomes Whincop’s _Scanderbeg_, (1747), p. 195.
An account of the lives and writings of the English dramatists is
annexed to this play.

[54] Following the Scottish rebellion in 1715, Lord Derwentwater and
Lord Kenmure were executed, February 24, 1716. The king’s pardon, which
excepted forty-seven classes of offenders, appears in _The Historical
Register_ for 1717, II, 247; so that the excitement caused by the
rebellion continued for some time. Doran’s _London in Jacobite Times_
discusses this period in a most interesting manner.

[55] The second title of _The Female Virtuosoes_.

[56] _Apology_, II, 58.

[57] _Preface_ to _The Good Natured Man_.

[58] See, for example, _Steele and The Sentimental Comedy_, by M. E.
Hare, in _Eighteenth Century Literature, An Oxford Miscellany_, Oxford,
1909. This speaks of “Sentimental Comedy invented by the great essayist
Sir Richard Steele.”

[59] Macaulay, _History of England_, Chapter VII.

[60] During the reign of Charles not every one had been in entire
sympathy with the state of the theatre. Evelyn, in a letter to Viscount
Carnbury, February 9, 1664-1665, in speaking of the acting of plays
on Saturday evenings says: “Plays are now with us become a licentious
excess, and a vice, and need severe censors that should look as well to
their morality as to their lines and numbers.”

[61] Traill, _Social England_, IV. 593.

[62] _The Laureat_, p. 53. “I can remember, that soon after the
publication of Collier’s book, several informations were brought
against the players, at the instance and at the expense of the Society
for the Reformation of Manners, for immoral words and expressions,
_contra bonos mores_, uttered on the stage. Several informers were
placed in the pit, and other parts of the house, to note down the words
spoke, and by whom, to be able to swear to them and many of them would
have been ruined by these troublesome prosecutions, had not Queen Anne,
well satisfied that these informers lived upon their oaths, and that
what they did, proceeded not from conscience, but from interest, by a
timely _nolle prosequi_, put an end to the inquisition.”

[63] The “Joan Sanderson” was a dance in which each one of the company
takes part. It began by the first dancer’s choosing a partner, who in
turn chose another, the chain continuing until each one had danced
alone and with a partner. See G. C. M. Smith, _Fucus Histriomastix_,
_Introduction_, p. xviii.

[64] _Apology_, I, 85.

[65] _Ibid._, I, 194-5.

[66] _Dramatic Miscellanies_, III, 432.

[67] See Miles, _The Influence of Moliere on Restoration Comedy_, 1910:
published after this paper was written.

[68] Celadon, in Dryden’s _Marriage a la Mode_, enters marriage with
the distinct expectation that his wife will be untrue to him.

[69] At the Restoration ten of the actors were attached to the
household establishment as the king’s menial servants, and ten yards of
scarlet cloth with an amount of lace were allowed them for liveries.
This connection lasted until Anne’s time. Genest, II, 362.

[70] Elizabeth Woodbridge, _Studies in Jonson’s Comedies_, _Yale
Studies in English_, IV.

[71] _The Development of Sentimental Comedy in the Eighteenth Century,
Anglia_, XXX.

[72] _The Theatre_, II, 511. By John Dennis. His temper and prejudice
often destroy the value of his writings as impartial evidence, but in
this case he is right.

[73] _The Man of Mode_, V, ii.

[74] _The Funeral_, I, i.

[75] Davies, _Dramatic Miscellanies_, III, 412.

[76] _Ibid._, III, 409.

[77] The substitution of one person for another in the marriage
ceremony, or a false marriage, are favorite devices of Congreve. See,
for instance, _The Old Bachelor_ and _Love for Love_.

[78] _The Elder Brother_ and _The Custom of the Country_.

[79] Rutilio’s sojourn with Sulpita. _The Custom of the Country_, III,
iii; IV, iv.

[80] Which Vanbrugh portrayed in his play, _The Relapse_ (1697).

[81] The comic scenes from _Marriage a la Mode_ and _The Maiden Queen_.

[82] Centlivre, _Love at a Venture_; Burnaby, _The Ladies Visiting
Day_, and _The Reformed Wife_.

[83] _The Ladies Visiting Day._

[84] _Love for Love_, II, xi.

[85] _To the Reader, The Provoked Husband._

[86] Cibber’s _Lives of the Poets_, IV, 120; Wilks, _A General View of
the Stage_, p. 42.

[87] R. M. Alden, _Prose in the English Drama, Modern Philology_, VII,
4.

[88] _Preface_ to _Woman’s Wit_.

[89] _Dedication_ of _Love’s Last Shift_.

[90] _Dedication_ of _Love Makes a Man_.

[91] III, 100.




  BULLETIN OF THE UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
  HUMANISTIC STUDIES

  _Vol. I_          _January 1, 1914_          _No. 2_


  STUDIES IN
  BERGSON’S PHILOSOPHY

  BY

  ARTHUR MITCHELL, PH. D.

  _Assistant Professor of Philosophy in the University of Kansas_


  LAWRENCE, JANUARY, 1914
  PUBLISHED BY THE UNIVERSITY




CONTENTS


  PART ONE
  BERGSON’S PHILOSOPHIC METHOD
                                                          _Page_
  CHAPTER I
  The Relation of Philosophic Method to the Definition of
      Philosophy                                               9

  CHAPTER II
  Bergson’s Critique of Pure Reason                           17

  CHAPTER III
  The Ancient Prejudice against Analysis                      26


  PART TWO
  BERGSON’S SYSTEM OF DOCTRINE

  CHAPTER I
  Ontology and Epistemology                                   37

  CHAPTER II
  Mind and Matter, Spirit and Body                            64

  CHAPTER III
  Doctrine of Freedom                                         82

  CHAPTER IV
  Bergson’s Abhorrence of Determinateness                     94

  CHAPTER V
  The Mystical Yearning of Intuitionism                      102


  PART THREE
  BERGSON’S GENIUS                                           107




PREFACE


In the second part of this essay material from two papers published
in the _Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods_ has
been laid under contribution, and also from my doctor’s thesis. Much of
this material was written in 1909, since which time a number of views
which some of mine resemble more or less have been published. It has
not seemed to me necessary always to note these agreements of thought
arrived at independently by myself and others.

I have reported a part of the brilliant critique of Bergson’s doctrine
of freedom by Monsieur Gustave Belot. This expresses with elegance
and force much of my own reaction to the doctrine. Indebtedness to
Belot and other authors is acknowledged throughout the essay. Except
possibly Professor Bergson himself, there is no one who has influenced
my thinking so much as Professor Ralph Barton Perry, my teacher who
introduced me to Bergson’s philosophy. Professor Perry’s writings
are full of finished renderings of less articulate convictions of my
own; and, though I have often referred to and quoted from his work
explicitly, his instruction and stimulus have had so much to do with
the history of my thinking that I could never say just what I owe him,
but only that I owe him much.

Professor Bergson has permitted me to translate from a private letter
some comments of his on certain of my criticisms.

Professor Edmund H. Hollands has given the first two parts a careful
reading, in the manuscript, and his able criticisms and suggestions,
mainly concerning the matter itself, have been of great benefit.

I am no less obliged, for help in improving the literary form, to
Professor S. L. Whitcomb, whose critical ability has been patiently
applied to a careful revision, page by page, of the whole manuscript.

I have tried, in the third part, to justify explicitly the great and
unique value which I attach to Professor Bergson’s work, antagonistic
though my own convictions are to his results. And, besides this aim,
it has seemed to me interesting and instructive, in view of the very
considerable literature which has grown up about Bergson’s philosophy,
to bring together in a comparative view the judgments of a number of
his exponents.

For literature by and about Bergson, the reader is referred to the
exhaustive bibliography prepared last year by the Columbia University
Press under the direction of Miss Isadore G. Mudge, the Reference
Librarian. “The bibliography includes 90 books and articles by
Professor Bergson (including translations of his works) and 417
books and articles about him. These 417 items represent 11 different
languages divided as follows:--French 170, English 159, German 40,
Italian 19, Polish 5, Dutch 3, Spanish 3, Roumanian 2, Swedish 2,
Hungarian 1.” This work is invaluable to the student of Bergson. It is
incomparably the fullest Bergson bibliography extant.

                                ARTHUR MITCHELL.
  University of Kansas,
    January, 1914.




PART ONE

BERGSON’S PHILOSOPHIC METHOD




