CHAPTER I

THE RELATION OF PHILOSOPHIC METHOD TO THE DEFINITION OF PHILOSOPHY


One of the problems of philosophy is the nature of philosophy itself.
In recognizing such a problem at all, I suppose, the beginning of its
solution has been made. For the very question, what is this or that?
is conditioned on an incipient definition of the subject of it, a
discriminating acknowledgement of it as something in particular, and,
so, as something already more or less qualified or defined. Certainly
there would be no common problem and no difference of theory without
such initial agreement as a point of reference in disagreeing.

But the explicit statement of this starting point of agreement
encounters a practical dilemma. On the one hand, anything can be
defined in terms so general that the thing is bound to be included:
make the genus large enough and it includes anything. The limit, in
this direction, would be to define the object as a case of being; which
would be safe, but hardly a start toward determining anything about
it. On the other hand, the least advance toward narrowing the meaning
incurs a very rigorous obligation to produce a principle of selection
which shall be a satisfactory logical warrant for narrowing it in just
the way selected, since this way excludes others whose claims may be
in question. The situation is thus beset with the pitfall of logical
presumption.

There are three quite distinct conceptions of philosophy, in the form
of ill criticized assumption, each of which is taken by its adherents
to be unquestionable--as safe as the concept “being.” I will word them
thus: (1) An absolute _evaluation_ of reality; (2) A _revelation_
of reality in its _essential nature_; (3) A _comprehension_ of the
_meaning_ of reality.

The first of these conceptions is that of Kant and Fichte and
those philosophers to whom reality seems unrelated to apprehending
consciousness, related only to will. Reality is neither directly nor
indirectly perceivable. Knowledge of it is possible--if the term
is proper at all--only in the broadest sense of “knowledge,” the
sense equivalent to “consciousness,” within which will is sharply
distinguished from two more or less receptive or cognitive modes,
thinking and feeling. Knowledge of reality is thus, for this type of
philosopher, a practical, personal evaluation of it, only; a moral
disposition or attitude.

The second conception is Professor Bergson’s; its meaning is a
peculiarly intimate acquaintance with reality. It is a relationship
between reality and consciousness in the æsthetic mode, consciousness
as the quality-knowing faculty, very explicitly distinguished by
Bergson, under the name “intuition,” from the relation-knowing or
intellectual faculty.

The third conception, the analytic or intellectualistic, means
knowledge about reality, such knowledge as may be relatively
independent of acquaintance. The second and third conceptions are
distinct from each other only in emphasis, and may be indefinitely
approximated toward each other, to the limit of mutual identity.
But, historically, the philosopher’s besetting sin of hypostasis has
pushed the emphasis, in each of these two conceptions, to so vicious
an extreme that they contrast with each other sharply. Pushed to
such extreme, the third conception has been stigmatized by adherents
of the second as “vicious” conceptualism or intellectualism. By the
same right, the intellectualist may denounce intuitionism as equally
“vicious.”

To these three conceptions of philosophy this is common: a relationship
between reality and consciousness which is apogeal. Philosophy is
at any rate a _supreme experience_, a mode of consciousness which
is eminent over other modes. But this initial generalization is too
indeterminate to constitute a satisfactory theory of the nature
of philosophy; whereas (for the other horn of the dilemma), the
above attempts at greater specificity appear to invoke no logical
principle, but rather to follow a deep-lying personal instinct,
without due critical reflection on it; in other words, without logical
justification of it. They all beg the question.

Such ill criticized assumption concerning the nature of philosophy
is what determines a philosopher’s “method” in distinction from his
“doctrine.” The names voluntarism, intuitionism and rationalism have
been applied to philosophies whose method is one or other of the
three outlined above. Religion, art and science are their models,
respectively. Under voluntarism fall the romantic and the pietistic
philosophies, wherein value is all that is real, and personal attitude
towards value is the only mode of consciousness that illuminates
reality. Intuitionism includes radical empiricism, temporalism and
mysticism. Such philosophies are based on the conviction that only
quality is real, only intuition is knowledge. And under rationalism are
positivism and absolutism, in which reality is order and knowledge is
reason.

If art, science and religion correspond to the ancient triad feeling
(intuition), thought (intellect) and will, it would seem either
that philosophy must be consciousness employed in one or more of
these modes, or else that a fourth mode of consciousness, coordinate
with these, must correspond to philosophy. Such a mode has not been
discovered. Philosophy must therefore be one or two or all three of the
above things. Can analysis of that generalization which was derived
above from the more specific definitions produce a logical principle
capable of determining the genuine philosophic method among the three
modes of consciousness, feeling, thought and will? Yes, such analysis
of the _supremacy_ which is a feature common to all three conceptions
of philosophy proves unequivocally that philosophy must be a function
of intellect, and cannot be a function either of will or of intuition.

This would not be the case, needless to say, if “supremacy” were here
a eulogism. Eulogistically, either of the three modes of consciousness
has equal claim to supremacy. That mode of consciousness to which
reality is most interesting is supreme, in the eulogistic sense, and
this depends on the philosopher’s personal constitution. To the man
of dominating intuition, the relations and teleology of things may
be incidental characters of them; but, by comparison with reality’s
qualitative aspect, those other aspects are relatively extrinisic and
accidental. In whatever sense it may not be true, in the eulogistic
sense it is true that such a man’s supreme experience is intuitional
rather than intellectual or ethical. Bergson’s psychological life seems
to be of such a type. But, for the man of ethical, and for the man of
intellectual prepossession, supreme experience cannot be intuitional,
in this sense of supreme. Yet, if an intuitional bent be regarded
by anyone as a hopeful qualification for effective philosophizing,
no intuitionist denies to the man in whom reason or will, instead,
is paramount, the possibility, by proper effort, of achieving the
genuinely philosophic--that is to say, intuitional--activity. And when
such a man does, in spite of difficulty, achieve it, it has the same
supremacy, as philosophy, that it has for the intuitionist, for whom
it is, more fortunately, _also_ supremely congenial and “worth while”.
It is not this latter supremacy, therefore, but the other, which
distinguishes philosophy, on the intuitionist conception; and that
other supremacy has a meaning which is thus proved to be independent of
relation to any constitutional prepossession or aptness. If philosophy
is intuitional, this is not because intuition is any man’s most
characteristic faculty.

And so of the two other modes of consciousness, reason and will, in
which, in different beings, according to their constitution, life
most naturally and best finds realization: for each of these modes
of consciousness, as for the intuitional mode, there is one sort of
experience, called philosophy, which is distinguished by a certain
supremacy of self-same nature, independent of any distinction of
personal constitution among philosophers. The voluntarist, indeed,
might claim a peculiarly eulogistic supremacy for volitional experience
over any other kind; for it is ethically supreme for all, whatever
one’s constitutional bent. But its ethical supremacy is no more the
_philosophic quale_ of volitional experience, on the voluntaristic
conception of philosophy, than is its other eulogistic supremacy, its
mere congeniality, for the strongly volitional type of character. For,
men of such character may be conspicuously deficient in philosophic
faculty in the judgment of all, including the voluntarist philosopher.

Reason, finally, commands recognition of supremacy, among the modes of
consciousness, in another sense, a sense distinct from the imperative
or ethical supremacy of will. The supremacy of reason is its exclusive
reflectiveness; and reflectiveness as the _quale_ of reason is
the same character as criticalness; that is, it is the faculty of
judgment. It is important to note that this critical reflectiveness is
a _differentia_ of reason; it is not a character of intuition nor of
will. The proof is that reflection is the substitution of a relational
for a substantive object of consciousness, and relationality is
nothing else than rationality. Thus, if feeling, will and rational
thought are conceptually distinct, reflectiveness is foreign to the
first two, and to anything coördinately distinct from rational thought.
When consciousness is employed with an emphasis on the _qualities_
of its object, in distinction from aspects of value and relation
(which also belong to any object), consciousness is intuitive, in
the intuitionist sense of the term. In entering a consciousness,
the qualities become, _ipso facto_, content of that consciousness,
taking their place in this setting under the name “sensations,” or
“sense data.” It is the act of reflection which “sets” the mind’s
data in contexts; which is aware of contexts, that is, and of the
setting of data in them. It is the reflective act which names its data
accordingly, as “quality” or “sensation”, and is conscious of them as
elements of their relational setting. Consciousness is volitional when
its focus is a value. In the context of the subject’s consciousness,
the value becomes a purpose. Thus value as substantive object of
consciousness, again, is object of will just as the substantive quality
was object of intuition; while value as element in the relational
complex in which it is known as “purpose,” is object of reflection.
Reason, then,--that is to say, mind active in the relation-knowing
way--is the mode of consciousness in virtue of which mind is
reflective, critical, judgment-forming; and it is a confusion among
definitions of intuition, will and reason, to attribute reflectiveness
to intuition or to will, as such. The peculiar supremacy of reason
which inheres in reason’s reflectiveness is due to the inclusion of
consciousness itself in the content of relational consciousness and of
no other mode of consciousness.

Intuitionists and voluntarists, the same as intellectualists, do,
as a fact, always characterize that supremacy which distinguishes
philosophy, in no other way than the critical way. There is no dissent,
in intuitionist or voluntarist schools of philosophic method, from this
residual core of meaning in the conception of philosophy: by universal
consent philosophy is consciousness (in whatever mode) sitting in
judgment on its own findings; philosophy is critical reflection.
And _therein_ is an ultimateness and absoluteness--in a word, a
supremacy--which belongs to philosophy, on any view of philosophy,
and to no other type of mental activity. But in rationalism, or
intellectualism, alone, it is recognized that reflection, as such, is
essentially and distinctively rational.

It is, then, the contention of this essay that the supremacy
peculiar to philosophy--which, by common consent of voluntarism
and intuitionism, is no eulogistic nor even ethical supremacy, but
critical--decides absolutely, among the three modes of consciousness,
against will and intuition in favor of intellect, as the organ of
philosophy, of intellectualism as the sole genuinely philosophic
method. Kant called his voluntarism the “Critical Philosophy,” to
distinguish it, as genuine philosophy, from what would be but failed
(because it was not critical) to be philosophy. Critical his philosophy
is; but because it is critical, it contradicts its own voluntarism--the
assertion that reality is knowable only in obedience of will, and not
in judgment. A contradiction; for _this_ (the gist of his voluntarism)
is a judgment whose subject is reality. The inevitable fundamental
intellectuality of noumenal knowledge is concealed, for Kant, under
the phrase “postulate of will.” A postulate, so far as it is genuine
knowledge, has indeed the character of necessity, but its necessity is
simply the fact of logical implication.

With the intuitionist variety, and particularly the Bergsonian variety
of anti-intellectualism, this essay is largely to be concerned. At
this point I merely note the inevitable contradiction in Bergson’s
intuitionism, as in Kant’s voluntarism. Intuition, Bergson explains,
is “instinct that has become disinterested, self-conscious, capable of
_reflecting_ upon its _object_ and of enlarging it indefinitely.”[92]
Now, consciousness reflecting upon its own data is criticism,
predication, classification, judgment--whatever it is, it is the
_objectifying_ of the data of consciousness, a thing which it is
essential to instinct or intuition, on Bergson’s own conception of
them, never to do, and which, precisely, on his conception, is the
distinguishing function of intellect. “Instinct is sympathy,” says
Bergson, in the same passage; and the sense in which instinct is
sympathy is lucidly and emphatically explained as just this, that
there is no distinction of subject and object, in instinct; they
are identical. Whereas, intelligence or intellect is explicitly
distinguished by him from instinct primarily in the disjunction of
subject and object. It is merely to turn his back on his own use of
these terms to describe philosophy as instinct extending its _object_
and reflecting upon itself.

       *       *       *       *       *

That the case of philosophical anti-intellectualism is a hopeless
paradox, whether in voluntarism or in intuitionism, each of these
methods itself best proves by its own inevitable intellectualism.
The terms voluntarism, intuitionism, and rationalism express no real
distinction of psychological mode, in philosophizing, since the
psychology of every philosophy is necessarily characterized by that
critical reflectiveness which constitutes philosophy a function of
intellect. Philosophy is always interpretation, a function alien to
what anybody ever meant either by will or by intuition; a function
whose essential distinctness from both those functions is attested
universally in such synonyms of “interpretation” as judgment,
conception, understanding, reason.

There are, it is true, voluntaristic and intuitionistic, philosophies
of the highest importance. And the intention of their authors is to
distinguish their method from the rationalistic method. Are they
foredoomed to futility on this account? So far as this intention
is realized--yes, unquestionably. No philosophy that were itself a
function either of will or of intuition is conceivable, since it would
then lack the essence of philosophy, which is critical primacy. That
philosophies designated by these methodological terms may be invaluable
products, it is necessary only that these terms apply in fact not to
the psychological method of the philosophy but to its psychological
starting-point. They express a constitutional bias in the philosopher,
who, after all, is human. To some the qualities of things; to others,
value; and, finally, to other some, the order of reality is the
“essence” of reality. Such essentialness is eulogism, of course. For it
is an irreducible psychological fact that there are religious, æsthetic
and scientific types of mind. Each to his bias; each to his taste. The
apogee of living is religion to the first, art to the second, science
to the third. Hence the illusion that philosophy, which must needs be
experience supremely critical, is experience eulogistically supreme.
Is not this illusion chargeable to failure to see in these three modes
of consciousness three emphases or biases of living? To the æsthete,
certainly, quality must be realest essence. But it cannot be so to the
zealot; for, to him, that is value: nor to the intellectualist; to him
it is order.

If æsthete and zealot will philosophize, they are at this disadvantage
with the wise man, that their philosophy can do no more, in expressing
the nature of this “realest essence” of reality, than the wise man’s
rationalism may do--discourse about it, interpret it. Philosophy indeed
never can, and never should aspire to enter into the inner nature of
reality in any such sense as the immediatism of Bergson and James
summons it to do. There is art and there is religion for that. It is
not clear how the qualitative or how the teleological aspect of reality
is more internal to it than its relational aspect; but, at any rate,
philosophy has its own interest, and that is distinct from those of art
and religion. Wherefore the own proper interest of art or of religion
is not served in their philosophy; in their philosophy they deny
themselves. The efforts of such philosophies to wrest from reality, in
a non-intellectual way, its secret, must be rather superhuman. This
characterization is hardly a burlesque of Bergson’s own observations
on his method, for it is little less than the repudiation of our
natural constitution, to which he exhorts us.[93] But, as with Kant,
so with Bergson, prodigies of subtlety fail to produce a revelation
of truth that is so subtle as to be inarticulate because immediate,
or that does not lend itself to discussion and interpretation. Or,
if this is not to be looked for in a philosophy which is ‘a method
rather than a doctrine,’ neither is there any suggestion how such
revelation may be socialized, rendered human; or even, in fact, how
it can assume _meaning_, meaning to the philosopher himself (which is
surely indispensable to truth), without becoming predication--assertion
and denial;--that is to say, without becoming judgment. If humans
make superhuman effort, it should not be surprising if the result is
self-contradiction.




