CHAPTER I

BROWNING’S GENERAL INTEREST IN ART.


I. SUBJECT MATTER OF BROWNING’S POEMS.--Three prominent facts
concerning the subjects of Browning’s poetry are: the comparative
insignificance of nature, the extensive treatment of art, and the
predominance of the human soul. Only a few poems contain any extended
reference to nature; and where such reference is found, nature is
usually treated, as in _By the Fireside_, for its effect on human
beings, and the soul still remains the dominant subject. Nature for
its own sake is never a supreme concern. It is never considered as
a primary moral force, akin to a personality, as in Wordsworth. The
loveliness of nature is never personified for the sake of its own
sensuous beauty, as in Keats or Shelley. _Pauline_, a youthful effort
of which Browning later became ashamed, was written under the influence
of Shelley, and approaches the style of that poet in the prominence
and beauty of its nature descriptions; but no such examples of pure
nature descriptions are found in Browning’s mature work. Several
of the well-known longer poems--_Pippa Passes_, _Christmas-Eve and
Easter-Day_, _The Flight of the Duchess_, for example--as well as
other shorter lyrical poems, contain the nature element; but it is
comparatively slight, and usually introduced for harmony, for contrast,
or to give a mere unshaded background for the characters.

Concerning the predominance of the soul in Browning, every critic of
the poet has written. It does not seem necessary to repeat any of this
familiar criticism here. However, the emphasis placed upon personality
and the soul does have a bearing on the discussion of Italian arts and
artists as found in Browning. For personality is the dominant factor
behind Browning’s selection and treatment of the Italian arts. Those
arts in which personality is strongest he uses most. The poems having
some one of the arts as a main theme usually had their origin in an
interest aroused by some unique personality. Some further discussions
of the relations of art and personality will be found in each of the
five following chapters devoted to the individual arts; and more
extended discussion is given in the general summary of Chapter VII.

Concerning Browning’s treatment of art, numerous articles have been
written; but they are limited for the most part to consideration
of one art or one poem. Browning, however, is the poet not of any
one art but of art in general and of all the arts. Throughout life
he was interested in more than one art and in spite of the seeming
improbability of his ever having had serious doubts on the subject, it
is stated[163] that he was long undecided whether to become a poet,
a musician, or a painter. He might, says his biographer, have become
an artist and perhaps a great one, because of his brilliant general
ability and his special gifts.


II. INTEREST IN MUSIC.--As a child, Browning received a musical
education and became a pianist of some ability. His appreciation of
music was further cultivated, during his young manhood, by attendance
at the best concerts and operas which London afforded. Beethoven seems
to be the composer mentioned most frequently in biographical sketches
and in his letters, a fact which may indicate his preference in music.
During the latter years of his married life, according to letters by
Mrs. Browning, he took charge of the musical education given to their
son, Wiedemann. So far as appreciation of Italian music and attendance
at concerts in Italy are concerned, he seems to have been little
interested. But again in the years following 1873, while Browning was
in London, he was in frequent attendance at musical concerts. His
interest in music, then, was no intermittent fancy. It was constant and
above the average. If any further proof of his interest in music were
needed, it is found in the influence of that interest upon his poems;
for they show a finer appreciation of music and a greater knowledge of
its technique than those of any other writer.


III. RELATION TO PAINTING.--A knowledge of painting and a liking for
it as well, were cultivated in Browning’s earliest years, through the
medium of the Dulwich Gallery. Though it is probably impossible to
trace the exact influence of this gallery on his writings, it may be
suggested as the source of references to Italian art before his visits
to Italy, and as the original stimulus of his interest in the subject.
At least, the Dulwich Gallery was only a pleasant walk from his home,
and there his father constantly took him.[164] There “he became
familiar with the names of the great painters and learned something
about their works. Later he became a familiar figure in one or two
London studios.”

Whatever the cause of a certain decline of interest in painting
previous to 1841 may have been, that decline was of short duration.
Probably it was due to the increasing attention he was giving to
poetry as a serious occupation. When he began to feel himself better
established in his poetical career, he returned to his interest in the
sister art. A letter which he wrote to Miss Haworth (probably in 1841)
says that he is coming to love painting again as he did once in earlier
years. In the same letter he speaks of his early efforts at the age of
two years and three months, and characterizes himself as a wonderful
painter in his childhood; but he adds, “as eleven out of every twelve
of us are.” Such a remark, while it shows an early interest in art, and
indicates that his fond relatives may have considered him a youthful
prodigy in art, as fond relatives have a habit of doing on slight
premises, implies that he himself did not consider his artistic ability
seriously.

Browning’s interest in painting, as well as in sculpture, was retained
throughout his life. On September 19, 1846, Mr. and Mrs. Robert
Browning set sail for Italy; and from that time on, the wife’s letters
are full of references to her husband’s interest in art. In a letter
from Pisa dated November 5, 1846, she says she means to know something
of pictures; for Robert does, and he will open her eyes for her.
Here at Pisa, she continues, the first steps in art, for her, are
to be taken. A letter dated October 1, 1847, mentions their friend,
Mr. Powers, the American sculptor. Mr. Story, another sculptor; Mr.
Kirkup, the art connoisseur; Fredrick Leighton; a French sculptress
named Mme. de Fauveau; Gibson; Page; a Mr. Fisher, who was painting the
portraits of Mr. Browning and Wiedemann; Mr. Wilde, an American artist;
and Harriet Hosmer--all these artists are named as acquaintances of
the literary Brownings who were stay-at-home people in Florence. Many
letters also mention trips to certain places where individual pictures
were seen, such as “a divine picture of Guercino” (August 1848),
Domenichino’s “David” at Fano (August, 1848), and the works of Guido
Reni, Da Vinci, the Carracci, and Correggio.

Although Browning never had a course of thorough instruction in art,
he gave some attention to drawing during the reaction from literary
work that followed the publication of _Men and Women_, in 1855. A
letter from Mrs. Browning to her old friend, Mrs. Jameson, dated May 2,
1856, gives the story. After thirteen days application on the part of
her husband, she tells us, he produced some really astonishingly good
copies of heads, though his purpose was only to fill in the pause in
his literary career. Then Mrs. Browning adds: “And really, with all his
feeling and knowledge of art, some of the mechanical trick of it can
not be out of place.”


IV. RELATION TO SCULPTURE.--A similar though less conspicuous interest
in sculpture[165] was maintained through Browning’s entire career. The
first mention of it in either letters or poems is found in a letter of
1838, to Miss Haworth, in which the statement concerning Canova implies
disappointment and previous expectation. _Sordello_, 1840, contains the
first reference found in a poem; and from that time on, some references
are found with a considerable degree of regularity in both poems and
letters. While the interest was not great compared with that taken in
painting, it was fairly continuous. No mention of Italian sculpture is
found in the poems of Browning after the publication of _The Ring and
the Book_, in 1868-9; though references to the art of Greece, the great
home of sculpture, occur frequently.

In 1860, a letter from Mrs. Browning says that her husband has begun
modeling under the direction of Mr. Story at his studio. She speaks of
his progress, of his turning his studies in anatomy to account, and of
the fact that he had already copied two busts--those of young Augustus,
and of Psyche. At this time he was working six hours a day at modeling.
“His habit,” says Mrs. Browning, “was to work by fits and starts”; and
as in the case of drawing, he had undertaken work in sculpture until
his mind should be ready again for poetical work.


V. SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PRECEDING SECTIONS.--Many other statements
showing an appreciation of the arts are found in the biographies and
letters of the Brownings. Of these, some details will be mentioned
later, in connection with the treatment of each separate art. Only such
facts have been noted here as tend to establish the basis on which our
discussion is built--namely, that Browning had a great and continuous
interest in the fine arts and that it is only reasonable to expect a
considerable amount of knowledge and appreciation of them to appear in
his writings. Our final conclusions will concern _personality_ as the
source of Browning’s interest in the arts.


VI. TIME SPENT IN ITALY.--The amount of time spent by Robert Browning
in Italy is a further reason for expecting Italian art themes in his
writings. In 1838, at the age of twenty-six, he made his first trip to
Italy; and in 1844 he was again there, from August or September until
December. In 1846, Robert and Elizabeth Barrett Browning went to Italy
to live, and excepting intervals for trips to France and England, were
there until the death of the latter in 1861. For several years after
this, Browning spent most of his time in England. In 1878, however, he
returned to Northern Italy; and of his eleven remaining years, seven
autumns were spent in Venice, until his death there in 1889.


VII. ENGLISH KNOWLEDGE OF ITALIAN ART IN BROWNING’S TIME.--In spite of
the fact that Browning spent so much time in Italy, the space given
to Italian art in his poems is remarkable because so little was known
of that subject in England at that time. Vasari’s rambling, gossipy,
and sometimes inaccurate biographies may have been known in England at
this time. Even if so, Browning, at least, seems not to have become
acquainted with them until the years of his residence in Italy; for a
letter written in 1847 by Mrs. Browning to Horne, says that they are
engaged in reading Vasari.

During the nineteenth century, the history of art began to assume a
more important place as a distinct branch of general history. The
century was well advanced, however, when the first complete work in
this subject appeared--Kugler’s _Handbook of the History of Art_.
It was not translated from the German until 1855, when the part
referring to Italy was published in an English translation by Sir
Charles Eastlake. (Many of Browning’s best art poems were published
in 1855, and some of them previous to that time.) Taking this work
as the beginning of modern treatment of art history, and noting the
fact that the next work of importance referring to Italian art
alone and treating it from the historical standpoint was published
by Crowe and Cavalcaselle in 1876, it is evident that nothing like
the present general knowledge of it could have existed in England in
Browning’s time. Certainly this makes his treatment of art history,
particularly the facility with which he presents the tendencies of
different periods, more remarkable than similar attainment would be in
more recent times. Even with the added knowledge resulting from recent
investigations, no other writer has been able to produce such perfect
poems of the musician or the painter as Browning has built about Fra
Lippo Lippi, or the Italian by adoption, Abt Vogler.[166]


VIII. NON-ENGLISH THEMES AND SETTINGS IN GENERAL.--The Italian
element is only one result, though a very significant result, of a
general tendency on the part of Browning to choose poetic subjects of
non-English character. From the Orient,[167] from Greece,[168] from
France,[169] from any region, in fact, which pleased his fancy, however
remote, he levied his contributions. With this general non-English
tendency, it is not surprising that in Italy, where he spent so much
time, he found material for every sort of poem from _Fra Lippo Lippi_
to _Luria_ and _The Ring and the Book_, and that he should shape his
material into poems with much of the atmosphere of Italy, the home of
the arts.


IX. A QUANTITATIVE STATEMENT.--As a matter of fact, the supposition
that Browning’s poetry embodies a large amount of Italian art reference
is correct. Forty-nine poems out of two hundred and twenty-two, or more
than one-fifth of the entire number, have some mention of one or more
of the arts or artists of Italy, while other poems deal with the arts
of other nations or with a general comparison of the arts.




