CHAPTER III

THE ANCIENT PREJUDICE AGAINST ANALYSIS


The restrictive conception of intellect is a very old one. The
incompatibility of intellect and life, as cognitive organ and object,
is certainly as old a belief as the era of the Sophists. It can be
said, that is, with historical certainty, that, from the time of
Protagoras--and I have no doubt it has been true ever since the first
philosopher, whoever he was, undertook to make an examination of the
universe as one thing--it has always been true that many of the best
minds have been convinced, by the futile results of such undertakings,
that the universe as one thing, on one hand, and intellect, on the
other, make a pair as incompatible, in the relation of cognitive organ
and object, as the faint star and the fovea: you have an organ and an
object which by nature are unsuited to each other. That kind of organ
cannot see that kind of object. Not that the faint star is invisible,
but, to see it, you musn’t look! Then it will swim into the field of
the organ that is made to see it, the retinal tissue surrounding the
fovea. Thus it is not a question of human finitude or limitation. The
formulæ of intellect, applied to such an object, are mere silliness,
reducible, as Kant showed, to all manner of antinomy and paradox.
Not only that, but whatever is most important and interesting within
this whole, everything concerning the nature and meaning of concrete
cases of life, eludes and baffles conceptual statement,--which is the
only kind of statement there is,--inevitably eludes it, like smoke in
a child’s hand who tries to catch it. Your essences or definitions,
of life or any of its manifestations, are stuff and nonsense, not
inadequate, but absurd. What logical sentence has ever been uttered
that, upon the least reflection, does not fail to develop into a
grotesquely false caricature when applied to any genuine phase or
interest of life, great or small--whether God, freedom, immortality,
or the heart of a woman, or of a child, or of a man (to take them in
a descending order of their unsearchableness)? You may labor your
conception with prodigious precision--the truth of the matter is always
beyond, when you are speaking of matters that are real.

This is the artist’s temper of mind when the artist has inadvertently
gulped down a noxious dose of metaphysics. It is the feeling of the
novelists, the dramatists, the poets, that Bergson voices: life
may be lived--nobly or basely, courageously or cowardly, truly or
falsely;--and the flavor and significance of life may be heightened,
life may be realized more abundantly, in artistic activity, which is
putting oneself into one’s object, making it become not an object,
identifying oneself with it. But one thing is not given to man, and
that is to _interpret_ life.

Everyone is familiar with the telling dramatic force of the device
which consists in involving a philosophical hero, a man addicted to
principles of high generality, in sudden overwhelming emotional chaos,
in which all his philosophy goes to smash. The refractoriness of sexual
love, for instance, to all his theories is such a delicious _reductio
ad absurdum_ of the theories. First you make your philosopher develop
his maxims, in a besotted, fatuous conviction of their infallibility:
then a particularly impossible she enters, one who is conspiciously
unfitted, by artlessness or disabilities of worldly station, for the
upsetting of principles great and high. The philosopher goes through
his paces, eating his maxims whole, with unction; and you have the
spectacle of Life rising serene, untouched, above the futilities of
theory. The theory doesn’t work. The obvious conclusion is that there
is some fundamental incommensurability between it and the simple facts
of life that can flout it so. _Simon the Jester_ is a very delightful
example of what I mean. Simon is bound to come to grief, he is so
smugly philosophical. The wise novel-reader knows what to expect. Not
that philosophy is not an ornament to a man, a civilizing, disciplining
exercise. All that is one thing, but acting as if such notions _apply_
is quite another. This good philosophical chap gives the result of his
philosophy in regulating his life, as follows:

“Surely no man has fought harder than I have done to convince himself
of the deadly seriousness of existence; and surely before the feet of
no man has Destiny cast such stumbling-blocks to faith ... No matter
what I do, I’m baffled. I look upon sorrow and say, ‘Lo, this is
tragedy!’ and hey, presto! a trick of lightening turns it into farce.
I cry aloud, in perfervid zeal, ‘Life is real, life is earnest, and
the apotheosis of the fantastic is not its goal,’ and immediately a
grinning irony comes to give the lie to my _credo_.

“Or is it that, by inscrutable decree of the Almighty Powers, I am
undergoing punishment for an old unregenerate point of view, being
doomed to wear my detested motley for all eternity, to stretch out my
hand forever to grasp realities and find I can do naught but beat the
air with my bladder; to listen with strained ear perpetually expectant
of the music of the spheres, and catch nothing but the mocking jingle
of the bells on my fool’s cap?

“I don’t know. I give it up.”

Giving it up is obviously the moral, here. The change of attitude
implied in the last words marks the beginning of an era of glorious
fulfilment of life in the former philosopher’s history. What was
necessary was that he should stop theorizing and learn to live. That
is, philosophy, as supreme experience, is the art of living. It is the
artist that really knows, that knows inwardly and truly. The genuine
philosopher is the artist in living. The intellectualist philosopher is
a dissector of life’s defunct remains.

The nature of the opposition between the two modes of consciousness
called intuition and intellect is discussed in the chapter on Bergson’s
epistemology. The intuitionist philosopher is such never for logical
reasons, always for temperamental reasons. He is a man to whom life
is richer and fuller, more self-fulfilling, more natural, in the
intuitional mode of consciousness than in the intellectual. Hence the
suspicious and disparaging disposition toward the intellectual mode of
consciousness, in a very numerous class of minds of the highest order.
From a personal feeling of safety and security in intuition and of
dissatisfaction with intellectual efforts, the transition is natural to
a conviction that the trouble is in the essential nature of intellect.
A mode of consciousness which is so inveterately and (presumably)
inevitably beset with self-frustration cannot be knowledge. It is too
obviously the opposite of knowledge, to wit error and delusion.

But once the opposition has reached this point, where not only the
convenience but the very validity of intellect is impugned, one is
involved in a disjunction between these two modes of consciousness
that is demonstrably false, both logically and psychologically. It
is surely a false hypostasis of terms whose distinction is merely
abstract, to set over against each other in this way two aspects which
are equally essential to any conception of the nature of consciousness.
For intuition and intellect can be seen to imply each other with the
same necessity with which quality and quantity imply each other. And
there is the same absurdity, on the side of epistemology, in regarding
intuition as valid knowledge and intellect as not valid, as, on the
side of ontology, in regarding quality as real and quantity--or
relation in general--as not real. As if either were conceivable except
as a co-aspect or coefficient with the other, in the nature of reality.
This would be to conceive of quality as quality of nothing, or relation
as relation between no terms.

If philosophy must be reflective (and reflectiveness to some degree
is undoubtedly an inevitable condition of human consciousness,
perhaps of any consciousness), it must be, _quatenus_ philosophy,
intellectual, and not, _quatenus_ philosophy, intuitional. Intuition
will assuredly be there, in any philosophy, as the pole is inseparable
from its antipodes. But the philosophicalness of philosophy is just
its reflectiveness; that is, once more, _quatenus_ philosophy, it is
intellectual.

I am recording a protest against false reification of what is abstract,
the very fault which intuitionism is insistent to lay to the charge
of intellectualism. If intuitionism were to conceptualize intuition
and intellect, instead of reifying them, it could not appropriate
validity to either mode of consciousness and deny it to another.
The satisfactoriness and richness of a given mode of consciousness
depend no doubt on the constitution of the subject. The validity
of consciousness in any mode has nothing to do with such personal
idiosyncrasy.

James is less rigorous concerning the validity of relational knowledge
than Bergson. Having found relations in the immediate content of
conscious data, James cannot deny them an essential constitutiveness
in the nature of reality. But such knowledge is “thin” and “poor”,
in his homely and human phraseology. This is only a more naïve and
genial expression than Bergson’s of the purely eulogistic primacy of
quality over relation. Relations are thin and poor aspects of reality,
no doubt, if you find them so. Otherwise they may be supremely
interesting. That depends on your interests, which depend on your
constitution. In any case, they are the aspect of reality primarily
indispensable to reflective thought, which is philosophy.

       *       *       *       *       *

The characteristic which is most sedulously imputed by the philosophy
of instinct to intellect is usefulness, but this characteristic
is treated as evidence of cognitive invalidity! In point of fact,
serviceableness to action in no way distinguishes intellect from
instinct. Each alike is a reactive state resulting in a new situation,
a new arrangement of matter; and the only thing that can give true
finality to the intelligent act is the affective value of the conscious
state arising out of this new situation. But the same is true of the
situation which is the outcome of the instinctive act.

The distinction sometimes seems to mean that it is only acquaintance
with objects (intuitive knowledge of them) that has affective value,
and that this kind of consciousness is therefore an end in itself in
a sense in which intellect is not. For knowledge about the object
(intellectual knowledge of it) will then be supposed to have no
affective value in itself, but only as it may subserve action upon
the object, which action will be accompanied by acquaintance with the
object. But if knowledge about an object subserves acquaintance with
it, the converse is no less true. If knowledge of the location and
price of a tennis ball subserves my use of it and acquaintance with it,
the latter in turn subserves my knowledge about it in an indefinite
number of respects. True, acquaintance with an object may not always
lead to knowledge about it so obviously as in the case of the tennis
ball; but again it is equally true that knowledge about certain things,
for instance lines drawn upon the blackboard, has no obvious leading
toward utility; the utility of a certain mathematical equation may
seem quite inscrutable. But how obvious the leading may be, or how
interesting the utility, is nothing to the point. The question whether
or not the connection is necessarily there in all cases is answered
peremptorily _a priori_ by the polar character of knowledge by virtue
of which acquaintance-with is only an aspect of knowledge-about, and
_vice versa_.

It is flagrantly untrue, as a fact, that knowledge-about is without
affective value in itself. Experience is as emphatic to the contrary
as reason. If a characteristically intellectual state of mind gives
you less satisfaction, or more, than one that is characteristically
intuitive, the reason is quite personal and accidental in either case.
It may just as well give you more as less. Being knowledge in each
case, awareness at least, it has its affective value in some degree
necessarily, of whichever character it may be predominantly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Since relation is not divorcible from quality, nor intellect from
intuition, it results that, if the artist blunders through critical
defect, even better art would, of itself, have saved him in spite of
his critical defect. If the mustiness of the philosopher is expressible
as lack of a facile instinct, merely a truer theory of life would have
corrected him. No doubt life is too intricate for the most robust
capacity for ratiocination. Sanity balances securely between the two
biases of consciousness. Art and criticism are equally long, and the
middle course a is short-cut and an economy of living. But condemnation
of the validity of consciousness in any mode is a theoretical
proposition irrelevant to maxims of practical sagacity. And it implies
either condemning the validity of all consciousness (if intuition
and intellect are aspects of each other) or else it presupposes that
reality is not categorical, which Bergson fails to show. On page 24 of
the present essay, we have seen that he seems, in an inconsistent way,
even to maintain the contradictory thesis.

In a former paper[97] I have written as follows:

“Now, Bergson’s idea of the philosopher--an artist in life--is probably
no one’s else. He is of that opinion, decidedly; a considerable part
of the book [_Creative Evolution_] is a demonstration that actual
philosophers, from Plato on, are intellectualists all, dissectors,
not artists. But if Bergson’s enterprise is to be a _substitute_ for
philosophy and appropriate its name, we who are much addicted to the
old enterprise will be careful to know why it is futile and illusory.”

Monsieur Bergson comments on this in a private letter from which I
translate:

“It would be so, I recognize, if these intellectualist philosophers had
been philosophers only in virtue of their intellectualism. But whereas
intelligence pure and simple professes to solve the problems, it is
intuition alone that has enabled them to be put. Without the intuitive
feeling of our freedom, there would be no problem of freedom, hence no
determinist theory; thus, the different forms of determinism, which are
so many forms of intellectualism, owe their very existence to something
which could not have been obtained by the intellectualist method. For
my part, I find, more or less developed, the seeds of intuitionism in
most of the great philosophic doctrines, although the philosophers
have always tried to convert their intuition into dialectic. Yet it is
chiefly in the former that they have been philosophers.”

This seems to me an absolute inversion of intuition and intellect. Does
intuition ‘put problems’? It is, certainly, intuition that gives us the
material of our problems. But the formulating of a problem--what can be
meant by intuition’s formulating anything? Giving forms, I should say,
just defines the work of intellect. Intuition gives us our facts, our
material. Surely, the putting of problems is an intellectual operation
continuous, even identical, strictly, with their solution? A problem
well put is rather more than half solved. Certainly the remainder of
the solution is not a different order of activity. It carries out
the ‘putting’ in its implications. A problem put is only a problem
incompletely solved.[98] Solving it is putting it with a satisfactory
perspicacity.

Without the intuitive feeling of our freedom there would be no problem
of freedom, certainly, but you might easily have the intuition without
the problem. In the preface to the _Essai sur les données immédiates de
la conscience_, Bergson insists that it is the aberrations of intellect
that give rise to the problems of freedom. Intellect, then, at any
rate, not intuition, puts the problem.

As correlative modes of consciousness, neither is independent, nor
primary, of course. Even in the putting of our problems, intellect
is only a co-factor, a coefficient with intuition. And in the
most abstract reasoning, the intuitive coefficient of thought is
indispensable. So far as intellect is actual, concrete knowledge, it
must be intuitively correlated, and so far as intuition is the real
intuiting of anything, it must be intelligently correlated.

In what respect are the philosophers of whom Monsieur Bergson speaks
intuitionists? Does this mean anything more than that they are
wide-reaching and far-reaching instead of narrow and dull in their
apprehension? Is not philosophy interpretation of experience? Is not
the philosopher’s vision, therefore, always necessarily, just so far as
he is a _philosopher_, a vision of the formal aspect of reality? To be
sure, that is just what Monsieur Bergson is denying. But his reason is
that reality is pure quality, a proposition whose logical faultiness
and temperamental genesis I have sufficiently noted.

In view of the temperamental basis of the artistic and the
philosophical or critical attitudes, it were fatuous for either
to propose a reform in the other by way of conformity to a mode
distinguished from it thus radically. It is this fatuity which it seems
to me Bergson commits in regarding the success of any philosophy as
due, by any possibility, to its becoming art instead. As well conceive
that the virtue of an artistic product _consists_ in its conformity to
critical canons.

Philosophy that is false to art would therein necessarily be false to
philosophy; and art that is false to philosophy is false to art; but
art is not philosophy, nor philosophy art.




PART TWO

BERGSON’S SYSTEM OF DOCTRINE




