CHAPTER IV

BERGSON’S ABHORRENCE OF DETERMINATENESS


A deep, temperamental abhorrence of determinateness--that is the motive
of Bergsonism. By admission of Bergson, any object of the mind is
determinate. But therefore a philosophy that repudiates determinateness
in the nature of reality is ineffable because it is objectless. It is
ineffable also because any reason offered for the indeterminateness
of reality is determination of it. The dread of determinateness is
the dread of reason, of explanation, of interpretation--in a word, of
philosophy. A consciousness which can ‘testify that we are free’ is
not an objectless consciousness; and freedom, if consciousness can
testify to it, cannot be an indeterminate nor an immediate (_i. e._
unobjectified) datum of consciousness. Bergson’s position is that it
is essential to the true nature of reality _in itself_, under whatever
aspect--_e. g._ duration, motion, freedom etc.--to be subjective;
and that this is why Zeno is right in finding motion, for instance,
unthinkable; for “unthinkable” properly means (though it did not mean,
for Zeno) incapable of becoming objective. This to say, is it not,
that the true nature of reality independently of all point of view
is to be viewed from a certain point! It comes to this, at least, if
to be subjective is compatible with being known in any sense, with
being contained within consciousness at all. Otherwise it comes to the
skeptical (and self-contradictory) doctrine that it is essential to the
true nature of reality to be unknowable in every sense. The former, of
course, is Bergson’s view regarding subjectivity.[144]

The anti-intellectualist doctrine, however, that data of consciousness
cannot be understood, conceptualized, defined, or even named--cannot,
in short, be objectified--without contradiction is as important for the
problem of knowledge as it is for the problem of freedom. Professor
Perry’s analysis of immediatism[145] shows the misunderstanding of
what it is to conceptualize, which underlies such a doctrine. The
anti-intellectualist idea seems to be that the concept is static,
and common to more than one consciousness, and universal in its
denotation, and sharply discrete; and that for these reasons it could
not correspond to what is fluid and private and uniquely particular
and continuous. It is evidently the “copy theory” of knowledge, which
unconsciously determines this criticism of the concept. Concepts
are invalid, applied to life, _because they are not like living
objects_! “You cannot make continuous being out of discontinuities,”
is James’s criticism.[146] And Bergson’s: “Instead of a flux of
fleeting shades merging into each other [intellect] perceives distinct
and, so to speak, _solid_ colors, set side by side like the beads of
a necklace.”[147] But, as Perry shows, to conceptualize is nothing
like this procedure. Conception is _substitution_ of one object of
immediate consciousness which is conveniently abstract, for another
object which is, in the circumstances of the conceiving, inconvenient
in its concrete fulness. All that is necessary in order that this
substitutional mode of consciousness should be valid and true
knowledge of the object so symbolized, is that the substitute should
_mean_ that object. And that it can and does mean it when the object
is a subjective state is no more than the fact that, on Bergson’s
own showing, such states are symbolized. For to mean is essentially
to symbolize. Certainly no one concept is a rounded-out exhaustive
awareness, so to speak, of the symbolized object. But this is no more
than to say that conceiving is a selective and eliminating mode of
consciousness--which does not distinguish it from any other mode, the
most immediate and intuitive possible state of genuine significant
consciousness being essentially as much an elimination as a positing.

Since, then, a symbol never has (just by reason of its function as
symbol) the same structure as the object symbolized, there is nothing
either in the immobility, or the publicity, or the universality, or
the discreteness of any concept, or in its inclusion of all these
characters, to prevent its validly meaning the fluid and private and
particular and continuous. And the real must necessarily have the
conceptual characters, since the characters correlative to them, alone
regarded by Bergson as characters of reality, have no meaning _except
correlatively_ to the conceptual characters. Thus “fluidity of nothing”
is a phrase without meaning. The something which is fluid, requires,
in order that _fluidity_ as such shall be a datum of experience, a
coefficient aspect of immobility. It is not fluidity that flows. The
immobile, snap-shot conceptual form--not only does this _belong_ to the
cataract, as the possibility of photographing it proves, but this very
form is indispensable to the fact of flow in its genuine concreteness.
As for uniqueness, a fact so unique that it is like nothing else in
any respect, could not be discriminated. The bare discernibleness
of a datum requires a basis of discrimination which is common to it
and to that from which it is discriminated. Continuity is analogous
with unity, and has no meaning if there is no aspect, in it, of
composition, and so of discreteness, as unity is nothing if not union
of a plurality. That the real has the aspects eulogistically favored
by intuitionism is beyond question. That it has not the complementary
conceptual aspects is demonstrably false, and is an illusion of
“exclusive particularity,” explainable only by that prepossession with
a certain abstract view, whose psychological origin has been repeatedly
noted in this study.

Is it not truly a paradox to give the unnamable a long list of
names--life, consciousness, freedom, duration, intensity, quality,
heterogeneity etc.--and to write a book, whether practical or
speculative, concerning that which will not articulate into discourse,
(cf. above, p. 54-5), employing these names on every page; and to
conclude with a studied definition of freedom; and to avow that
the purpose of it all is to make the fact understood that the
subject-matter cannot even be named, still less defined or discoursed
about or understood? It seems improper to consider that the book is
_about_ such a subject, and yet necessary to suppose that it is about
some subject, and impossible to assign another. If it is true that,
in seeming to name this subject, you are deluded; that, in trying
to talk about it, you fail, and name and talk about something else,
instead, its spatialized symbol--then the conclusion is perfectly valid
that such a book is a case of this delusion. And the trouble lies in
that reifying of the coefficients of reality and of consciousness
which is the condition of a philosophy of “pure” intuition (cf. page
29). To suppose that genuine cases of awareness can be either pure
intuition or pure conception is to reify these coefficient aspects of
consciousness, which are as truly _both_ indispensable for the genuine
concreteness of an actual case of awareness as are the positive sine
_and_ cosine for the real acuteness of an angle (_i. e._ for the angle
to enclose acutely space revolved-through). As the zero point of either
trigonometric projection is the vanishing-point of the entity of whose
nature they are coefficient functions, so the “purity” of either
coefficient function of consciousness is the vanishing of any real
awareness.[148]

If no logical reason impugns the validity of conceptual knowledge of
subjective states, no more does the pragmatic test discredit such
knowledge. It is as good, genuine knowledge in its satisfaction of
vital interest as the sensation, say, which is the object of the state
in question. Helen Keller, incapable of the sensation blue, knows the
sensation--conceptually alone, of necessity--rather better, even, it
may be, than she would ever have known it if her life had been more
occupied in the knowing of blue--and other such--_things_; better,
at any rate, certainly, than most people know it. All this knowledge
can be is a rationalizing of “blue:” she can name it, define it,
understand it, make articulate and significant statements about it. The
intellectual mode of knowing blue is thoroughly significant. It finds
blue in experience, and enables the conscious subject to identify this
object when she comes across it. By this knowledge, blue is part of the
currency of Helen Keller’s social commerce. It is a factor in her life,
with its importance and interest. Obviously, she can have got it only
by conceptualizing it.

Of course the proposition that consciousness is indefinable has the
same futility as the proposition that it is unnamable; because, indeed,
they have the same meaning. The meaning, we have seen, is that, in
trying to name or define what is fluid, private, etc., there is a
miscarriage; it is something else that gets named or defined, to wit
the representative or symbol of what was aimed at. This symbol, being
fixed and public, is able to lend itself to application of the fixed
and public name or concept. But we have also seen that a name is only a
symbol; an unnamable thing could not be symbolized. If, by hypothesis,
it _is_ symbolized, it is therein namable.

But naming a thing is _ipso facto_ relating it, for it is associating
it with something else, its name or symbol; in naming the thing you
have started upon the process of defining it, which is the infinite
process of relating it or understanding it. Exempting things from
naming or definition, sequestering them from the rational domain, is
like setting a limit to space. Sequestering from the rational domain is
relating to it, and that is putting into it.

If the illusion in trying to name and define mental states is due
to their fluidity and privacy, by the same token the same treatment
of physical objects, which Bergson regards as valid treatment, is
in fact equally illusory. To be sure, physical objects have not,
according to the author, the flow of duration, but they are even less
dependable creatures than mental states, for in every new moment they
are something absolutely other than anything which was in the moment
before. Besides which, in spite of this really incessant instantaneity,
something, not explained, causes them, upon the “intersection” of our
duration with them, to _appear_ to us to be self-identical but changed,
even as we ourselves. Physical objects are not fixed. One finds no
exceptions in nature to the universal law of change; and the state of
any physical thing at a given moment is the outcome, in continuity, of
its previous states, to an indefinite regress of antecedents, quite as
the case stands with the ego. In respect to duration, discriminating
between physical and mental is not valid. Even between organic and
inorganic matter or between conscious and unconscious organisms the
difference is only one of degree or tempo of change. But if so, it
is arbitrary, if one regards the present state of the conscious
organism as embodying the whole of its past, to deny this of the stick
and the stone. Of course mental states are not permanent; subjects,
objects--nothing is permanent that has existence. Nothing stays as it
is. The scope of naming and defining is not limited by permanence.
Neither, however, is the flux of nature chaos, that it should not be
understandable. Change, on the contrary, is the manifestation of law,
in the time of Heraclitus, now, and forever.

Privacy or uniqueness is no more obstructive to understanding than
is change, and, like change, has no peculiar applicability to mental
states as matter of knowledge. Privacy or uniqueness applies to
physical objects of knowledge in essentially the same way as it applies
to mental states. Mere accessibility is, in principle, common for all
objects of knowledge, to all subjects.[149] But there is a special
reason why the subject of the state is particularly disqualified,
as compared with others, for knowing his state immediately, _i. e._
intuitively; namely, that, at the time of the existence of the state,
when, alone, it could be known intuitively, he is mainly occupied with
another object of knowledge, the object of the state in question.
You do not, then, know a mental state best by living it, or rather
_in_ living it; your knowledge of it is just then at its worst, since
you are then preoccupied in knowing something else. The state, as an
attribute of the subject, is clearly one of the subject’s relations,
and, so, conceptually distinct from either term. It cannot be at once a
knowledge and the object of that same knowledge. Bergson’s treatment of
the conscious state conceives it in just that way--as if the relation
were itself one of its own terms, the object.

Knowing a mental state can only mean understanding it. It is not a
concrete datum, like the sky, but an abstraction from the relationship
in which the subject and the sky function as terms. One does not
intuitively know the subjective process of blueness, in looking
at the sky; one knows the sky in that sense, but the process only
conceptually, by reflection. Is it any less an authentic object of
knowledge? Is it not itself--is it any symbol of itself?--which you
name and define and talk about and understand?

The practical significance of saying that one felt and now remembers a
feeling is not that the feeling is what one ever felt. Feeling Number
One is not an object for feeling Number Two, neither during Number One
nor afterward, in reminiscent feeling. So far as the reminiscent state
is another intuition, its object is the same as that of the intuition
remembered--so far. But to be reminiscent, a conscious state must
reflect upon, or refer to, a conscious state distinct from itself.
This reflective reference is a conceptual co-element together with the
intuitional character of the reminiscent state. So far as the memory is
reflective, consciousness is oriented toward the original state itself
as a fact, a process, conceptually distinguishable from the object of
it. It is thus only _so far as conceptual_ that subjective processes
can be objects of knowledge, or, in short, be known. But if so, Bergson
is wrong in two essential points: in denying that subjectivity can
be objectified, and in affirming that knowledge of subjectivity is
immediate (_i. e._ non-conceptual) or intuitive.

Any reminiscent state, like every other conscious state, undoubtedly
_is_ intuitive in a certain degree. The calmest reflection on an
originally affective experience is tinctured with a rudimentary
fluttering of the old feeling; just as, on the other hand, the most
violent early repetitions of a tempestuous joy or grief must relate,
in order to be reminiscent, to the original experience. No one else,
it may be said, can _appreciate_ my feeling as I do, myself: this
appreciation is no conceptualization of that feeling. This is only to
say that the affective as well as the representative aspect of any
conscious state is unique for each subjective center of interest. But
privacy no more distinguishes subjectivity from objectivity than does
change. Every object, being self-identical, is unique, its quality
private. Inasmuch as each conscious subject is a distinct center of
interest as well as a distinct cognitive subject, the affective value
of a state of a given subject must also be theoretically unique for
that subject. But the state is nevertheless objective and common as
well as subjective and private, since in fact it is an object for
understanding. My state of mind is as accessible to your understanding
as your own (it may be more so, to be sure). The understanding names
the intuitive state--anybody’s at all, indifferently, one’s own or
another’s-- as truly as it names any other relationship or process, by
virtue of its conceptual coefficient; and as truly relates it to the
rest of the rational universe, therein understanding and defining it.

The derivation of the three heterologies elucidated in the three
chapters of the _Essai_, is the inevitable consequence of the
fundamental heterology of an “absolutely” two-fold universe. The
intensity of mental states could not be homogeneous, for Bergson,
the variousness that belongs to them could not be plural, their
organization could not be determinate, because then they would be
objective, _by his definition_ of objectivity. But why may a subjective
state not be an objective state? To the conceptualist, to whom these
terms are abstract concepts, points of view, discursive contexts, there
is no reason at all. To Professor Bergson, who does what he accuses
conceptualism of doing, namely substituting concepts for concrete
realities, it is a contradiction, for one concrete reality cannot be
another. But a concrete reality which, for a certain purpose and in a
certain context, one symbolizes by the term “subjective state,” may
very well be the same concrete reality which, for another purpose, one
symbolizes by the phrase “objective state.”

We have seen that intensity which is “pure,” pure quality, is pure
nothing, being quality of nothing; since, if it is quality of
anything, it has its quantitative coefficient, which destroys its
purity. So variousness which is “pure” heterogeneity, is not even
various, but “nothing” again. For it is “interpenetrating” instead
of “juxtaposited” or impenetrable heterogeneity. But impenetrability
is just identity, as Bergson remarks;[150] it is a logical principle
rather than a physical law. That two bodies cannot occupy the same
space and time means that they would therein not be two, or coexistent.
Now, interpenetration in any rigorous sense, any but the loose
colloquial sense of small division and uniform diffusion, is the mere
contradiction of impenetrability or identity. It means that two bodies
do occupy the same space at the same time. If, then, this law of
interpenetration thus means to require (in the subject) the relation of
coexistence, and also (in the predicate) to forbid it--in other words,
if it is contradictory to itself--mental states can obey it no better
than pebbles. And, finally, non-quantitative causality is a third
contradiction, since its “pure” heterogeneity destroys its continuity
in time as well as in space (cf. above, page 93).

How can any of these three pairs of heterologous principles of space
and time be “absolutely” different if, however different, each pair
have such essential community of nature that both must be called by
one name and thought under one category, as two species of the same
genus? For, in spite of all their differences, they are, throughout the
discussion, two kinds of intensity, of multiplicity, of causation.




