CHAPTER II

MIND AND MATTER, SPIRIT AND BODY


Bergson regards knowledge of oneself as the optimal case of knowing;
oneself, he thinks, is the sample of reality which best serves for an
acquaintance with the nature of reality in general. “The existence of
which we are most assured and which we know best is unquestionably our
own, for of every other object we have notions which may be considered
external and superficial, whereas, of ourselves, our perception is
internal and profound.”[118] It is this perfect or optimal relation
of identity or inwardness--which one bears to oneself--that is the
condition of true (_i. e._ intuitive) knowledge. And in this case we
find existence to be a perpetual flow of transition. That we think
of our states as distinct from each other is due to the fact that
reflection on one’s own existence is, unlike the flow of that existence
itself, necessarily discontinuous. It is only now and then that motives
arise which turn the attention to the self as an object, like others,
for examination. The flow of change is not uniform, to be sure. It
is quite imperceptible to our reflective attention most of the time,
but if it ever ceased, we should at that moment cease to exist. Only
the relatively sudden and interesting periods of transition get our
attention. Then we see a new “state of consciousness” which we add to
the others that we have mentally strung together in a temporal line. So
we conceive of our history as the sum of elements as distinct as beads
on a string.

This intellectualistic view of the self eliminates the peculiar
characteristic of its reality, namely, its duration, or the flow
of its change, like a snowball, accumulating its substance as it
rolls, duration goes on preserving itself in incessant change that
accumulates all its past. Time, Bergson says, is the very stuff the
psychological life is made of. “There is, moreover, no stuff more
resistant nor more substantial.”[119]

Life and inertia or matter are two antagonistic principles or
tendencies. Life is the positive and active principle; reality and
duration are predicable only of life. Matter is an “inversion”
or “interruption” of life; its value is negative to life and to
reality. “All that which seems _positive_ to the physicist and to the
geometrician would become, from this new point of view, an interruption
or inversion of true positivity, which would have to be defined in
psychological terms.”[120] Matter is a determination of reality in
much the same sense as that in which the reality of the Platonic idea
suffers diminution under the influence of the principle of not-being,
resulting in a world of sensible experience or of appearance. Bergson
points out that the real in Plato is the timeless, motionless, definite
idea, and the relatively unreal is the ever-changing “infinite” or
indefinable datum of experience, to which duration is essential.
Bergson reverses the Platonic metaphysics: reality is the ever-changing
and indefinable; rather, it is change itself. “There are no things,
there are only actions.” “... things and states are only views,
taken by our mind, of becoming.”[121] The principle antagonistic to
reality gives rise to the timeless, definite concept, which is a view
or appearance of reality operated by intelligence in the service of
action. As our practical interests break up the continuum of time
into discrete states, so they break up the continuum of matter into
distinct bodies. The active antagonism of time, which is pure quality
or heterogeneity, and space, which is pure quantity or homogeneity,
results in the world of our experience, comprising “states” of
consciousness and things or objects.

The relation between life and matter in the evolution of the world,
Bergson represents by the figure of a generation of steam in a
boiler.[122] Life, the positive principle, streams or flows, like the
steam, by the force which is its very nature. In its course, this vital
impetus is checked, as a jet of steam is checked, by its condensation,
and falls back upon itself in drops, retarding, but not annihilating,
the flow. But we are warned that the figure must be corrected in that
the interruption or inversion of the impetus is due to a principle
inherent in the impetus itself, not to an external determination. If
there were such an external principle, the two would seem coördinate in
reality, but the reality of matter is as the reality of _rest_, which,
as the negation of motion, is nothing positive, yet is not a mere
naught.

Sometimes, in reading Bergson, it seems very clear that reality and
matter must exclude each other, since one is the negation of the
other; and perception and conception, whose object is matter, are not
knowledge, because that object is unreal. Moreover, not only is the
stuff of reality that _psychic process_ which is life and lapsing time,
but there is no stuff more resistant nor more substantial. And in
numerous other ways the mutual exclusion of reality and matter seems
quite fundamental to Bergsonism. One can never remain long in any
security about this, however. If Bergsonism is Platonism reversed, it
is natural that the peculiarities of the latter should reappear in some
form. Platonic not-being is much too important and too active to be
denied a coequal positivity with being. Over and above these “worlds,”
moreover, there is that one in which we live, with a third status.
Perhaps it is this which is most like Bergsonian matter--“nothing
positive, yet not a mere naught”! In the letter from which I have
already quoted, Monsieur Bergson wrote me, concerning a previous paper
of mine:[123] “You give me the choice between ‘yes’ and ‘no,’ whereas
I cannot respond with either, but must mix them. In each particular
case, the ‘yes’ and ‘no’ have to be apportioned, and this is just why
the philosophy I adhere to is susceptible of improvement and progress.
For instance, you find that my premises lead to this conclusion:
‘Matter has no duration; but duration is synonymous with reality;
therefore matter is not real.’ But, to my mind, matter has exactly the
same reality as rest, which exists only as negation of motion, yet
is something other than absolute nothingness. All that is positive
in my ‘vital impetus’ is motion; stoppage of this motion constitutes
materiality; the latter, therefore, is nothing positive, yet not a mere
naught, absolute nothingness being no more stoppage than motion.”

If one seek (it is not to be found, I think, in Bergson’s writings)
an explanation of this abatement or diminution of the _élan vital_,
this tendency toward rest, the problem turns into the very ancient
problem of the polarity of being in subject and object. In Platonism,
matter arises as product of an eternal antagonism between two coeval
principles, the Idea and Not-being. Not-being is thus something
efficient, something that is capable of entering as a factor, together
with the Idea, into a product, the Sensible Object. The truth is,
therefore, that Not-being is something very real: it _is_ something
because it _does_ something. It is as real as the Idea, because it is
as efficient as the Idea. And in the Bergsonian creative evolution
there often seems just such an antagonism as this, between two
coördinate, efficient, and therefore real principles. Thus: “The
impetus of life ... is confronted with matter, that is to say, with
the movement that is the inverse of its own.”[124] And: “Life as a
whole ... will appear as a wave which rises, and which is opposed
by the descending movement of matter.”[125] But, as with Plato, so
with Bergson, dubbing the hated principle “Not-being” or “Negation
of Positive Reality” hardly avails against the soundness of its
claim to positivity. And the case is not different if the “_élan
vital_” is a self-limited absolute instead of an eternal dualism: the
philosopher’s selection of one of the two coefficients or poles of
this self-polarized absolute, rather than the other, to be snubbed, is
arbitrary, instinctive, personal. With Plato it is one, with Bergson
the other; no logical principle determines it, in either case.

On no other point, I believe, is criticism of Bergson so clamorous
or so unanimous as on his conception of matter. Without doubt, his
conception of matter is obscure. Time and space (terms equivalent for
Bergson, to life and matter) being essentially antagonistic, must
_essentially imply_ each other; and if so, do they not stand in the
same rank as real existences? In what sense, then, is either real
and the other unreal, except by an arbitrary decree? The ontological
obscurity has its corresponding epistemological obscurity as to the
cognitive status of knowledge of matter, which is the crux of Bergson’s
philosophy. Instinct is suited to life and duration; intelligence, to
matter and space. Science says many things about time, but affords no
acquaintance with time itself. The duration of the unit of time is a
matter of indifference to the meaning and value of any scientific
formula.[126] For example, if this unit were made infinity, and
the physical process represented by the formula were thus regarded
as infinitely quick, _i. e._ an instantaneous, timeless fact, the
instantaneity of the fact would be irrelevant to any truth expressed
by the formula. The only truth the formula expresses is a system of
relations, which remains the same for any unit of time. Science knows
no past or future, nothing but an incessantly renewed instantaneous
present, without substance. The conclusions of science are given in the
premises, mathematically; the world of science is a strict determinism.
In the real world of consciousness, on the other hand,--knowledge of
which can only be acquaintance with it--the future is essentially
contingent and unforseeable, for each new phase is an absolute
creation, into which the whole past is incorporated without determining
it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The active principle of life Bergson describes by the phrase _tendency
to create_. Its movement is a creative evolution. Life flows, or, as
we have said, rolls on like a snowball, in an unceasing production of
new forms, each of which retains, while it modifies and adds to, all
its previous forms. But the figure of the snowball soon fails. One of
the most significant facts of the creative evolution of life is the
division of its primitive path into divergent paths. The primitive
_élan_ contains elementary virtualities of tendency which can abide
together only up to a certain stage of their development. It is of the
nature of a tendency to break up in divergent elementary tendencies,
as a fountain-jet sprays out. As the primitive tendency develops,
elements contained in it which were mutually compatible in one and the
same primitive organism, being still in an undeveloped stage, become
incompatible as they grow. Hence the indefinite bifurcation of the
forms of life into realms, phyla, genera, species, individuals. It is a
cardinal error, Bergson thinks, to regard vegetative, instinctive and
intellectual life, in the Aristotelian manner, as successive stages in
one and the same line of development. They represent three radically
different lines of evolution, not three stages along the same line.

A tendency common to all life is to store the constantly diffused
solar energy in reservoirs where its equilibrium is unstable. This
tendency, of alimentation, is complementary to the tendency to resolve
equilibrium of potential energy by sudden, explosive release of energy
in actions. As the primitive organism developed (undoubtedly an
ambiguous form, partaking of the characters of both the animal and the
vegetable) these two tendencies became mutually incompatible in one and
the same form of life. Those forms which became vegetables owe their
differentiation from ancestral forms to a preponderant leaning toward
the manufacture of the explosive, as the animal owes its animality to a
leaning toward the release of energy in sudden and intermittent actions.

The vegetable, drawing its nourishment wherever it may find it, from
the ground and from the air, has no need of locomotion. The animal,
dependent on the vegetable or on other animals for food, must go where
it may be found. The animal must move. Now, consciousness emerges _pari
passu_ with the ability to act, and torpor is characteristic of fixity.
The humblest organism is conscious to the extent to which it can act
freely. Actions may be effective either by virtue of an excellence
in the use of instruments of action or by virtue of an excellence in
adapting the instrument to the need. Action may thus assume either
of two very different characters, the one instinctive, self-adaptive
reaction, the other intelligent manufacture. The two tendencies have
bifurcated within the animal realm. One path reaches its present
culmination in certain hymenoptera (_e. g._ ants, bees, wasps), the
other in man.

Thus the development of instinct in man has become subordinate; human
consciousness is dominated by intelligence. Hence the universality
of the vice of intellectualism in philosophy. Man, because he is
dominated by intelligence, supposes intelligence to be coextensive with
consciousness, whereas it is only one of the elementary tendencies
which consciousness comprises, and the one which is impotent to know
the flow of reality. Spencer’s evolutionism affords no acquaintance
with the reality of life. His so-called evolution starts with the
already evolved. Hence all it reaches is the made, the once-for-all,
the timeless. It is merely a biological theory, and no advance over
positive science. It is not a philosophy.

Having shown the origin of intelligence in the more extensive principle
of life, and limited its sphere of operation to inert matter, the
author turns to the nature of instinct. The greater part of the
psychic life of living beings that are characteristically instinctive
Bergson believes to be states which he describes as knowledge in which
there is no representation.[127] “Representation is stopped up by
action.”[128] A purely instinctive action would be indistinguishable
from a mere vital process. When the chick, for example, breaks the
shell, it seems merely to keep up the motion that has carried it
through the embryonic life. But neither instinct nor intelligence is
ever pure, and we have in ourselves a vague experience of what must
happen in the consciousness of an animal acting by instinct. We have
this experience in phenomena of feeling, in unreflecting sympathies
and antipathies. “Instinct is sympathy. If this sympathy could extend
its object and also reflect upon itself, it would give us the key
to vital operations.... Intuition, to wit, instinct that has become
disinterested, self-conscious, capable of reflecting upon its object
and of enlarging it indefinitely, leads us into the very inwardness of
life ... It is true that this æsthetic intuition ... attains only the
individual, but we can conceive an inquiry turned in the same direction
as art, which would take life _in general_ for its object.”[129]

       *       *       *       *       *

In _Matter and Memory_, mind is represented as varying, in its states,
between two limits, “pure perception,” which is just action, and
“dreaming.” The limit of action is where the rôle of mind ceases, the
vanishing-point of knowledge. But at the other limit, dreaming, mind
is in full swing, having freed itself, by an inner tension, from the
obstructive influence of body. Far from vanishing at this limit, as at
the other, knowledge is here at its apogee. It is here “pure.”

It is important for Bergson to recognize an organic connection
(obstructive to mind, as he Platonically conceives) between mind
and body, in order that he may establish the possibility of the
state of “pure perception,” in which mind activity coincides with
bodily activity by a yielding, relaxed concurrence with the latter’s
influence. Mind is here passive; its rôle in the life of the organism
ceases in this state. But it is equally important, for the ontological
independence of mind, that at the “dreaming” pole the tension which
is the very constitution of its knowing should free mind from bodily
influence. This tension, at its ideal limit, must so disconnect the
mind from the body that the former becomes impotent, as Bergson
says, for any efficiency in the physical world. It seems to be, to
all intents and purposes, a disembodied state. Knowledge having then
no possible end in action is clearly its own end. Intellection is a
utility, operating in the world of matter; knowledge is absolute,
self-centered identity of subject and object. Such, I suppose, is God’s
“thought of thought” in Aristotle’s conception.

This fluctuation of the relation between mind and body, from a
connection which is vital to absolute disconnection, is a reappearance
of the ambiguity discussed on pages 66-7. At one moment the world
seems a Platonic dualism; in the next, a self-limited or polarized
absolutism, like Fichte’s or Hegel’s. Whatever the “ideal limit” of
mind’s cognitive “tension” may be conceived to be, there ought to
be no question of more and less, in the matter of disconnectedness,
strictly speaking. We do not understand movement from connection to
disconnection, through intermediate stages, as mind is here represented
to move, in its states of knowledge. First mind must be like a certain
part of matter, so that it can rebound by its “tension” from a certain
other part; and then, as soon as it has rebounded, what would be true
of the thing that could do this must suddenly become untrue of it,
presumably because of the rebound, no other reason being assignable
to account for the ensuing disconnection with matter. One bit of
matter can rebound from another, but it is then as much connected with
_matter_ as before. We do not understand how mind, when it has thus
rebounded from one particular material attachment thereby becomes
materially unattached.

This is nevertheless a suggestive scheme of relation. It seems to me
to be marred with one radical fault: these limits of knowledge are
wrongly related. Their negation of each other should be the opposition
of antipodes, not of contradictories. The difference is the radical
difference between implication and exclusion. They do not exclude each
other, but imply each other. Each vanishes without the other.

In activity, there is externalized motion on one hand and resistance,
or virtual reaction, on the other. Action and reaction are cases of
polarity; they are necessary to each other to give each other form.
In the cognitive subject, reaction that were purely virtual, without
externalizing implication, would be indeterminate dreaming; motion that
were purely externalized, without implication of inner virtuality,
would be indeterminate activity. Now, anything that is indeterminate
or formless simply is not, if being has any significance whatever; for
formless significance is a contradiction; certainly the significance
of anything would constitute a formal aspect of it. “Pure” matter or
quantity is pure nothing, in the sense that it is quantity of nothing.
These “pure” limits thus snuff themselves out. And variation between
them is not a progression from not-being to being or _vice versa_, not
a strengthening or weakening of the variable function’s essence. Such
a notion depends on the absurdity of a not-being that can do things to
being, with fluctuating prepotency in the struggle! Strengthening and
weakening--degree in any guise--has no application to essence. In any
phase, that is, knowledge is itself and nothing else; it cannot be more
or less itself.

That which varies concomitantly with the variations in complexion of
consciousness, is the dynamic relation between subject and object. It
may be expressed as variation of ratio between virtual and real action.
At each pole activity vanishes, and consciousness with it. At one pole,
where the ratio is zero, it vanishes in the direction of “real” or
externalized action, which means that the subject meets no opposing
negativity, and so no object; the relation of activity is extinguished
through lack of one of its terms. At the other pole, where the ratio is
infinity, action vanishes in the direction of “virtuality.” And this
means that in the subject there is no positivity, no subjectivity, to
oppose to universal negativity or objectivity. The result is the same
extinction of the relation through lack of a term. A subject term is
lacking in one case, an object in the other.

Knowledge, for Bergson, corresponds only to the ratio infinity, of
virtual to real action; all other ratios between them are less than
knowledge. To this I object that infinite virtuality is indeterminate
virtuality, which is a naught reached in the opposite way from that
naught which is infinite and indeterminate actuality. Indeterminate
action is nothing, and so is indeterminate knowledge. Identification
of knowledge with any specific value of the ratio of virtual to real
action is not determined by any logical principle. When a function
varies between a positive and a negative pole, neither pole is an
apogee where the function is most itself. On the contrary, as in the
variation of an including angle, each pole is a limiting position in
which the essential nature of the variable is extinguished. Nor is
it most itself midway between the poles, nor at any other privileged
position, for it is absolutely and fully itself, and nothing else,
in every phase. The genuineness of a state of awareness would then
depend also on the genuineness of the reciprocity between the terms
of this dynamic ratio. Where they are not distinct, where subject and
object are identical, awareness vanishes through lack of a quantitative
coefficient, as it vanishes at each pole through lack of a qualitative
coefficient. In other words, knowledge of a thing by itself, like
action of a thing on itself, is a cancelation of terms of opposite
sign, a contradiction, and _the subject and object, whether of action
or of consciousness, are essentially external to each other_.

Bergson is treating consciousness as such as if it could be more or
less conscious, as, indeed, a conscious _subject_ may be. That is, he
is treating consciousness as if it could be of a nature more or less
aware or cognitive; he is treating variations of phase as if they
were augmentations and diminutions of essence; he is treating quality
quantitatively, an error which would not have been possible if he
had adhered to the purely conceptual distinction between quality and
quantity. And he is treating the variations of cognitive complexion
or phase as if they depended on variations in a certain relation (the
mutual externality of subject and object) which is invariable and
absolute--incapable, that is, of degree.

       *       *       *       *       *

“This book,” says the first sentence of _Matter and Memory_, “affirms
the reality of spirit and the reality of matter.” Lower in the same
page, however, it is explained that “Matter, in our view, is an
aggregate of ‘images.’ And by ‘image’ we mean a certain existence which
is more than that which the idealist calls a _representation_, but
less than that which the realist calls a _thing_,--an existence placed
half-way between the ‘thing’ and the ‘representation.’ ... the object
exists in itself, and, on the other hand, the object is, in itself,
pictorial, as we perceive it; image it is, but a self-existing image
(pp. vii, viii).

“... memory ... is just the intersection of mind and matter ... the
psychical state seems to us to be ... immensely wider than the cerebral
state ... our cerebral state contains more or less of our mental state
in the measure that we reel off our psychic life into action or wind it
up into pure knowledge ... our psychic life may be lived at different
heights, now nearer to action, now further removed from it” (pp. xii,
xiii, xiv).

The “intersection of mind and matter” suggests a profound dualism, and
this Bergson acknowledges to be essential to his theory. It is true
that no opportunity is lost, to discount the reality of matter; but the
relations which it sustains to mind are such as can exist only between
terms whose reality is coördinate. Perception is just that biological
reactive function of material organism engaged with material stimulus,
which every psychological text-book proclaims it to be. But the actual
conscious state always has memory in it, as well as perception; or
rather, the state as conscious is nothing but memory; perception
itself, “pure” perception, is action pure and simple, and not cognitive
at all.

This is an abuse of the word “perception,” but the epistemology can
show a good deal of reason. After all, our perceptions (as we call
the states of mind in which we are involved with a material stimulus)
mean something, necessarily. They mean _something_, I insist, the
strangest of them. We sometimes speak otherwise, saying that an object
of perception means nothing to us. But, I submit, this is only a manner
of speaking. A state that meant _nothing_, absolutely, were genuinely
_blank_, empty, contentless; and there is no difference, I take it,
between a state without content and a state that is unconscious. Well,
then, meaning something, as a conscious state must, what does it mean?
Bergson, I am sure, is right in holding that to mean is to recognize,
to recall, to remember. This makes of every concrete perceptive state,
so-called, a rudimentary deduction, a genuine syllogism, a work of
intellect. The major premise is a memory; the minor is an immediate
reactive, sensori-motor datum; the conclusion is the subsumption of
the present datum under the memory. Thus: The experience to which I
attach the name “orange” has such and such characters (remembered major
premise); the present reactive state has these characters (perceptive
datum, minor premise); therefore this state is a case of the orange
experience. The only difficulty is the nature of the process of
subsumption of the present datum with the memory. The present datum in
its purity as present is a reaction merely, an event in the physical
world. Its nature owns nothing psychical. What commerce, then, can it
have with mind? To call its commerce with mind “subsumption” is to give
a label to a problem. To call memory the “intersection” of the physical
world with mind seems another label, of a metaphorical sort, for the
same problem.

But, for the present, let us hear the doctrine. To my thinking, it
is Bergson’s best work, and full of illuminating suggestion. To the
radical dualist, it should be completely satisfactory. As an adherent
of a certain double-aspect conception of the body-mind relation, I
shall eventually propose a correction and completion, very radical,
certainly, but all that is necessary to make Bergson’s treatment of
this problem of the highest interest and value to myself.

The body, then, in Bergson’s theory, yes, the brain itself, is no
producer, repository nor reproducer of any element of consciousness.
The body is a center of reaction, and nothing else. “The size, shape,
even the color, of external objects is modified according as my body
approaches or recedes from them, ... the strength of an odour, the
intensity of a sound, increases or diminishes with distance; finally,
... this very distance represents, above all, the measure in which
surrounding bodies are insured, in some sort, against the immediate
action of my body. In the degree that my horizon widens, the images
which surround me seem to be painted upon a more uniform background
and become to me more indifferent. The more I narrow this horizon, the
more the objects which it circumscribes space themselves out distinctly
according to the greater or less ease with which my body can touch and
move them. They send back, then, to my body, as would a mirror, its
eventual influence; they take rank in an order corresponding to the
growing or decreasing powers of my body. _The objects which surround my
body reflect its possible action upon them._”[130] Cut a sensory nerve,
and the reactive process is destroyed, and with it, perception. “Change
the objects, or modify their relation to my body, and everything
is changed in the interior movements of my perceptive centres. But
everything is also changed in ‘my perception.’ My perception is, then,
a function of these molecular movements; it depends upon them.”[131]
“What then are these movements?... they are, within my body, the
movements intended to prepare, while beginning it, the reaction of
my body to the action of external objects ... they foreshadow at each
successive moment its virtual acts.”[132] It may seem that my reaction
to a body is the same whether I perceive it visually or tactually or
otherwise. But movements externally identical may differ internally;
there is a different organization of the same gross function with
different microscopic functions. The _meaning_ has ultimately an
important sameness, since meaning is a function of biological
adjustment. But different inner organizations are still the explanation
of different ways of perceiving what is, in all biologically important
respects, the same object.

Serious fault has been found[133] with Bergson’s attempt to establish,
by scientific research in the subject of aphasia, the ontological
independence of spirit, the seat of memory, from body. But on other
grounds than such scientific investigation the issue of this attempt
appears to me at best a futile achievement; for the result is in any
case the reinstatement, untouched, of that problem of all radical
dualism, a problem which Bergson solves only by metaphor whose
brilliance may be luminous itself, but has no illumination for the
problem, which is how reactive states are also conscious.

There is a theory which relates consciousness and matter to each each
other as the opposite sides of a surface in relief. The objection to
this “double aspect” theory that has weighed most, in criticism, is
that the ground of the parallelism between convexity and concavity--to
wit, a logical implication of each other--is obviously absent in
the parallelism of consciousness and matter. Whatever parallelism
experience actually finds between them is not deducible from either
concept: there is nothing in the definition of the sensation blue to
suggest an afferent nervous current; nothing in the latter to suggest
a sensation. They are incommensurate. But when you conceive convexity,
in that fact you conceive concavity also, and _vice versa_. They are
related as plus and minus. The objection appeals to analysis of the
definition of consciousness or of matter, or challenges the advocate
of the theory to study his sensation or his neural process and see if
there be in either of them anything of the other.

A difficulty which immediately arises when this challenge is accepted
has been understood to be decisive against the theory. It is this:
Any definition of consciousness which the advocate of the theory may
propose as the concept to be analyzed must, in order to fulfil the
first requirement of logical definition, be in terms of that which is
not consciousness. And this seems to the critic to beg the question.
If you define consciousness so, he objects, you make its definition
imply matter; but there is then nothing of consciousness in it; what
you have got is only matter. That is to assume an equation between
them. You state the value of _x_ in terms of _y_, but then you haven’t
got _x_, but only _y_. It is otherwise with terms that really have the
correlation you claim for consciousness and matter. Thus you can equate
convexity with concavity in terms of either alone, as _m_ = -(-_m_). In
this there is no assumption. But what you say of _x_ is that it equals
_ay_, which is something _distinguishable_ from _x_ and whose equality
to _x_ is just the problem.

But if it be allowed that the disparity between consciousness and
matter must be either a distinction between two kinds of reality, or
else the distinction between being and not-being, the predicament just
described is worse for the critic of the “double aspect” theory than
for its advocate. If the distinction is that of being and not-being,
whichever is not-being has an internal constitution and structure by
virtue of which parts and relations are recognized within it: matter
has physical laws and the interaction of bodies; consciousness has
interrelated states. Not-being, so interpreted, is hardly distinguished
from being. And if the distinction is within being, and exhausts
it, either the connotation of consciousness and that of matter are
referable to each other--expressible in terms of each other--or else
the distinction is only denotative, and they are not distinguished
as _different_; for difference is a discursive relation between
differents: _dif_fering from each other is a case of _re_ferring to
each other.

Excessive emphasis on the “ultimateness” and “absoluteness” of the
difference between these two concepts is just the inductive cue that
results in the “double aspect” theory. No one can regard consciousness
as not different from matter--least of all our critic, who finds them
incommensurable. Nay, among real things that are _other_ than each
other, experience gives us no fellow to such difference; for difference
so utter, they that differ should coincide. And so, in the fact of
aspect, we have, indeed, in a thousand forms, disparity that matches
the difference between the concepts now before us: _e. g._, right,
left; up, down; plus, minus; convex, concave.

We confess three obvious differences between the two equations which
we have taken to represent our critic’s conception of the relation of
convexity to concavity and the relation of consciousness to matter.
In equation (1), which is _m_ = -(-_m_), representing the former
relation, the same symbol _m_ stands on both sides; in equation (2) the
symbols are different, _x_ on one side, _y_ on the other. In (1) the
coefficient also is the same on both sides, namely unity; in (2) the
coefficients are different, unity on one side, _a_ on the other. And in
(1) the signs are opposite on the two sides, while in (2) the sign is
the same on both sides.

What do these differences mean? To begin with, is (1) monomial and (2)
binomial? No; in spite of the fact that there is only one symbol in
(1), this equation is binomial in precisely the same sense as (2) is
binomial; for it means that a certain attitude toward _m_, symbolized
by the minus sign, transforms _m_ into something _distinguishable from_
_m_. If equation (1) expressed an identity, it would not represent
the relation of convexity to concavity, which are not identical but
distinguishable. But what is thus expressed in (1) by difference of
sign is expressed in (2) by difference of coefficient; for (2) means
that a certain attitude toward the entity symbolized by _x_ (an
attitude symbolized by the phrase “divide by _a_”) transforms _x_ into
_y_. In short, the connotation differs, on the two sides, _in both
equations alike_. But on the other hand, the denotation is the same on
both sides in each equation, for such is the nature of all equations,
whether binomial or any other kind. Thus we have identity of denotation
with difference of connotation in each of these equations, and they are
so far homogeneous with each other. Now connotation is aspect, which
is determined by subjective attitude; and attitudes are interrelated
in determinate and accurately expressible ways; as, for instance, by
antagonism or mutual exclusion, or by any of an indefinite number of
forms of implication. The difference of attitude called antipodal
oppositeness, or polarity, is the specific difference expressed in
equation (1); whereas the coefficient _a_, in (2), expresses _mere_
difference of attitude, difference in general, including, therefore,
that specific difference which is expressed by opposition of sign. Thus
equation (1) is a case of equation (2).

To sum up: The objection, stated in these algebraic symbols, was this:
_m_ implies -_m_; _x_ does not imply _y_. Express the fact of relief
in terms of _m_ and you have the correlative fact in -_m_ implied
in the very definition of _m_; while if you express _x_ in terms of
_y_, you have _y_ values, and nothing but _y_. In short, _x_ and _y_
exclude each other; _m_ and -_m_ imply each other. Our answer is that
_x_ implies _y_ just as _m_ implies -_m_; for _ay_ is an aspect of the
same denotation as _x_; and, since the specificity of every aspect of
a given denotation is determinable or definable by relation to all
other aspects of the same denotation, any one of such aspects, as
_x_, implies, in its definition, every other, and so _y_, instead of
excluding _y_.

Turning from such abstract considerations to empirical study of the
sensation, the same sort of difficulty reappears. We think we find
a dynamic relationship of organic to extra-organic processes; this
relationship presents a material aspect, which we call neural activity,
and a formal aspect, which we call blue, for instance. But the critic
objects that all this is much more than sensation, and that we have
read our hypothesis into our data. We must keep to the pure sensation;
in that, there is no neural process. So, even as, before, all our
attempts to propose a definition of consciousness for analysis were
ruled out as begging the question, now every sample of the experience
to be observed is rejected as impure. There is no sensation that is
pure in such a sense as our critic means, for he means subjectivity
that implies no objectivity. If this is more than a word, it is a
self-contradiction, since subjectivity is subjectivity only in the
fact of correlation with objectivity. Indeed, if our critic were to
observe convexity as he proposes that we observe sensation, he would
find no implication of concavity in it; nor would he find it convex.
His observation would _be_ the convexity; the two would coincide, and
so would not be two. Convexity in its essence, as convex, would therein
no longer be the object of the observation. You have to get outside
of your convexity to observe it and its implication of concavity;
just so, you have to get outside of your sensation to know it; in
it, you know only the object of it. When convexity is said to imply
concavity, convexity is just therein not “pure,” as the sensation is
supposed to be. “Pure” convexity, analogous to “pure” sensation or
subjectivity, would be convexity without implication of concavity. That
would be zero convexity, so to speak--a self-contradiction. Just so,
the “pure” sensation, without implication of objectivity, is a fact of
consciousness without the essence of consciousness, which is dynamic
relatedness to an object. “Pure” consciousness is consciousness of
nothing, or no consciousness.

If our critic have his way, we have nothing left us to discuss.
Let us invite his attention to a discussable phenomenon of our own
designating, and definable in some such way as this: the simultaneous
belonging of an experience to an organism and to another material fact,
say the sky. The two belongings are distinguished by a _sui generis_
difference of direction or relational “sense,” which unambiguously
determines the organism to be the subject of the belonging, the sky the
object. We have at least as good a right to call this phenomenon by the
name of consciousness, or sensation, as our critic has to name that a
sensation which he so defines that its definition is contradicted by
the naming.

Now, experience is essentially dynamic, and, for an organism, to be
active is to be functionally ordinated or focalized. For example, the
eye and other parts may be subservient, in different ways and degrees,
to the hand. Then the organism is focalized into an organ of touch, of
striking, or whatever it may be. Every other function contributes as
accessory to this primary function, in the organism’s present phase.

We have called consciousness the formal aspect of activity, and we mean
by “form” applied to activity what we mean elsewhere, determinateness
or definableness. Here, in particular, it is that character which
depends on resistance or reactivity. Activity without resistance would
be without determination; its character or content would have vanished;
it would be activity upon nothing, which, like consciousness of
nothing, is nothing. So the resistance that factors in activity is not
extraneous to the essence of activity, and consciousness and material
processes imply each other not only with the same logical necessity but
with the same polar oppositeness of mutual relation, as the aspects of
relief.

Consciousness is thus the inversion or reciprocal aspect of organic
activity, virtual, in distinction from externalized or real, activity.
Where attention is focalized, action is most resisted. As action
approaches free vent, consciousness of the object of this free activity
becomes more and more evanescent. At the limit where action is
unresisted, it and consciousness go out, vanish together, in inverse
“sense” or directions. Where action approaches “pure” (_i. e._,
unresisted) activity, pure positivity, pure subjectivity, consciousness
approaches “pure” (_i. e._, unreacting) passivity, pure negativity,
pure objectivity. And such “pure” action and consciousness are pure
nothing, action on nothing, sensation of nothing. The vanishing of the
two relations together is, in each case, for lack of one of its terms
inverse to the term lacking in the other case.

This mutual symmetry between action and consciousness is an implicate
of their identity of denotation and mutual inversion of aspect; and
any study of the fluctuations and transitions of consciousness, with
its modulations of attention and inhibition, is accordingly a study in
inverse, a perfect logical function, of corresponding modifications
of organic activity; for in the play of the organic functions we
shall find incessant modulations between their focalization and their
dispersion, incessant shifting of their mutual rank and of the position
of primacy among them, to correspond with the changes between margin
and focus that are always going on among the elements of consciousness.

The organism is structurally and functionally centralized in a
sensori-motor system, where the afferent activity is opposed by the
efferent, in a common focus, or in coincident foci, in which action
and reaction give form to each other. Here organic reaction has its
inception in a preformation, schema or design, as Bergson says, of the
developed activity. An intricate manifold of functions are organized:
interest determines the ascendency or primacy of a certain function,
while others are subservient, being inhibited or reinforced in varying
degrees. The whole complex process has this character of focal,
unifying organization, a unity expressed in opposite aspects as the
simple form of activity, on the one hand, and as the simple object of
perceptive consciousness on the other.




