CHAPTER V

THE MYSTICAL YEARNING OF INTUITIONISM


I will conclude these comments on Professor Bergson’s teaching by
noting the mystical nature of the central idea of his epistemology,
the identification of subject and object. The yearning for a more
intimate acquaintance with the thing-in-itself, for a knowledge truer
and more searching than the “practical” and “useful” reactive relations
which we bear to our “phenomenal” objects--as if such experience were
unworthy the sacred name of knowledge--this, the prime aspiration
of the intuitional philosophy of Bergson, reduces to a futile, if
not a morbid, yearning after self-contradiction. The more you know a
thing “in itself,” the more you “internalize” your relation to it--in
short, the more you identify yourself with it--the less you bear any
significant relation to it at all, any relation, obviously, but that
of identity; the less, notably, you bear the active and cognitive
relations toward it. The indispensable condition of Paul’s knowing
Peter is that Paul should _not_ become Peter. Things can neither be
nor be conceived except in _some_ relations, any more than relations
without terms. If you know the thing in its relations, you know the
thing as much in itself as a thing is capable of _being_.

“You show,” writes Professor Bergson, in the letter quoted before,
“that perfect intuitive knowledge, as I mean it, would consist in
coincidence with the object known; but that then there would no longer
be knowledge of any object, since only the object remains.--Yet, in the
case of an entirely free action, _i. e._ an act in which the entire
person takes part, one is _altogether_ in what he is doing; one has,
at the same time, consciousness of what he is doing; and yet he is not
duplicated in observing his own activity, absorbed as he is in the act
itself: here to act and to know (or rather to possess) are one and the
same thing. Intelligence, always outside of what it observes, cannot
conceive of knowledge without distinctness of subject and object. It is
intelligence that propounds your dilemma: ‘Either there is knowledge
of the object, hence distinctness of object and subject; or subject
coincides with object, and then there is only object: knowledge
vanishes.’--But reality does not accept this dilemma. It presents us,
in the case cited, subject and object as a single indivisible reality,
action and knowledge of the action as a single indivisible reality, of
which intelligence _subsequently_ takes two points of view, that of
object and that of subject, that of action without knowledge and that
of pure knowledge. We have no right to set up these _points of view_ of
reality as _constitutive elements_ of reality itself.”

The last sentence accuses me of doing what I am most zealous to show is
the foundation fallacy of intuitionism! I have been contending that,
when Monsieur Bergson says that subjectivity cannot be objectified,
he is speaking as if “objectifying,” instead of meaning to take a
point of view, means to alter the reality symbolized by the word
“subjectivity.” (Of course the question concerns concrete cases of
subjectivity, the intuitionist contending that a given subjective state
cannot be objectified--_i. e._ named, defined, etc.) Now, this seems to
me precisely to “set up a point of view of reality as a constitutive
element of reality itself.” But intuitionism does even worse than this.
Having set up this point of view of reality, and treated it in this
concrete way, and worshipped it as the Absolute, it snubs that other
point of view, which, by the very nature of the genuinely concrete
reality, is coördinate with the deified abstraction, its brother and
peer. The object has “such reality as that of rest, which is the
negation of motion,” the absolute and positive; “yet it is not absolute
naught.”

It seems to me that Bergson virtually admits the impossibility of
the coincidence of subject and object when he says that instinct and
intellect are neither possibly pure, which is deeply true. But then an
action “completely free” is only a limiting case, is it not?--a case
which would put the action out of relation and so out of activity? In a
certain obvious sense “the whole person takes part,” perhaps, in _any_
action; but I cannot imagine any action or state that could be other
than a relation between object and subject. I cannot see how perfect
self-expression in one’s act makes in any degree for obliteration
of ontological distinctness between agent and patient, subject and
object. How may action be conceived to dispense with reaction? How deny
its relational character, then, without denying its activity--in short,
without contradiction? “Perfect self-expression” distinguishes certain
acts, no doubt, but the distinction is ethical, denoting a teleological
harmony, not a metaphysical identity between subject and object.

To say that one _is_ completely one’s act and yet _knows_ his act again
confuses a relation with one of its terms. Is it merely a matter of
taste to choose to say that such a state--_i. e._ perfect absorption in
one’s act--is _not knowledge_ of the act just in so far as it is the
act? Is it not necessary to distinguish between the subject’s relation
to the act, on one hand, and to those things, on the other (which are
neither subject nor act) entering, together with the subject, into
the act? Those things, it seems to me, are the object, and the act
itself a relation between the subject and them, a relation which wears
a conscious as well as an active aspect, and which, as knowledge, is
knowledge of the things, not of the act, not of itself.




PART THREE

BERGSON’S GENIUS




BERGSON’S GENIUS


Logical soundness is never amiss, and is notably desirable in a
philosopher; but Professor Bergson is assuredly right in thinking
that it is no measure of a philosopher’s genius. One’s feeling about
the fallacies of Spinoza and Berkeley and Kant may pale almost into
indifference, in the enthusiasm of following such heroic feats of
insight.

But then, it would seem, their greatness is their _insight_, and not
their logic, and insight therefore, after all, is philosophical genius.

We have seen that this is Professor Bergson’s conclusion. It can be
interpreted in a sense that is valid, of course: all depends on the
meaning of “insight.” I have insisted sufficiently on the reasons why
I cannot think Professor Bergson’s interpretation of it is valid.
It is a case in which the etymological and the actual meaning of a
word, in a certain context, differ and so give rise to ambiguity. The
word “intuition,” etymologically, means just “insight.” But then it
means consciousness functioning most completely, least abstractly.
Now, Bergsonian “intuition” is a conception so far from concrete
completeness that almost the primary object of his philosophy
is the demarcation of intuition from any actual state of which
consciousness is normally capable. It is true that Bergson insists
that consciousness, in a supernormal effort, is capable of the purely
intuitive act, and that in the capacity for this feat of knowing
lies all the hope of metaphysics. This is the ground principle of
Bergsonism, and I have nothing to add here, concerning its merits. In
a word, its fallacy is the fallacy of reification. No such feat of
consciousness is possible, not because it is more than the limited
power of actual mind can compass, but because it is a contradiction,
since it is consciousness without object, which is consciousness of
nothing.

The Bergsonian will object that, if Bergsonian “intuition” is
abstract, no less abstract is intellect; and, if philosophy is
insight,--consciousness most complete,--the thesis contrary to
intuitionism, that philosophy is intellectual judgment, is a case
of the same fallacy that has been charged to intuitionism, and is
inconsistent with the admission that philosophy is essentially an
insight which involves more than intellect.

The answer is first, that intellectualism, unlike intuitionism, regards
philosophy as indeed an abstract interest, and for that reason as not
separable from the living of a life which supports this interest in
a larger total interest; but, also for that reason, as not possibly
identical, either with life entire or with any interest, such as the
æsthetic, of like abstractness with philosophy. The answer to the
second part of the objection is that an insight which is more than
intellect is not for that reason without its intellectual aspect.
Consciousness is always significant, certainly; but if it has any
meaning, if it _is_ significant, it is, in that fact, intellectual.
And insight without meaning is a contradiction, and is assuredly not
philosophy. The appearance of inconsistency arises from the unconscious
identifying of insight with intuition in the falsely reified sense.
Insight in any such sense philosophy certainly is not. And yet the
intellectualist may properly attribute the greatness of a philosophy
to its insight rather than to its logical cogency, since cogent logic
may be dull and shallow and therefore not great. It is great if it is
far-seeing and deep. There is analytic insight, as well as intuitive.

After all is said, the feeling that even serious lapse of logic may not
be sufficient to destroy the value of a great philosophy is not the
same as the opinion that logic is immaterial to that value. No one, I
dare say,--intuitionist, intellectualist or anyone else--ever thought
this. The genius of a great philosophy is a superior perspicacity
in the recognition of the significance of problems, a superior
discernment of the problematic as such. “The earliest philosophers”
says Professor James,[151] “... were just men curious beyond immediate
practical needs, and no particular problems, but rather the problematic
generally, was their specialty.” But the perspicacity which sees
the meaning and bearings of a problem cannot fail to attack its
further interpretation with a superior freshness and originality.
And the interpretation of a problem, carried to the end, is its
only solution. Genius in philosophy thus also turns into superior
richness of suggestion in the solutions which it invents. Inasmuch as
the problem-putting and the problem-solving processes are continuous
with each other, and in this important sense one and the same thing,
it should be expected that philosophical genius would possess both
virtues, in any actual instance. And no doubt this is the historical
fact. On any view it is suggestiveness, fertility, which is the measure
of philosophical genius. And it seems to the intellectualist that
the possibility of philosophical fertility depends on a discursive,
intellectual co-implication of the parts of the realm of truth.

But although these two phases of philosophical genius--the
problem-putting and the problem-solving phases--have so intimate
a relation with each other, they can and do appear in different
emphases in different philosophers. The emphasis in any particular
case is undoubtedly determined in part from without, notably by
the philosopher’s epochal relations. Thales is greater, as well as
more momentous historically, in his _quest_ of an ἀρχή than in the
consummation of the quest. With Hegel’s material to work upon, the
emphasis in Thales’ genius would have been proportionately modified.
And if Bergson has not, like Thales, unearthed new problems, that is
nothing, for the question of the value of his work.

Indeed, the historical momentousness of a philosophy is quite largely
independent of its intrinsic merit in either of these senses, or in
any sense. Conditions which contribute to the vogue and influence of a
philosophy are many, some obvious enough, others more recondite. The
question of historical momentousness is thus only partly germane to an
estimate of a philosophy’s own intrinsic worth; and, in the case of a
contemporary philosophy, is in the nature of things (while the history
is yet to be made) an almost unmitigated speculation. Such speculation
regarding Bergson is no part of the present purpose.

One word more--before undertaking to appraise the genius of Bergson--as
to the motive of such an undertaking in this particular essay. It is
no part of the primary object of the essay. That object is the very
impersonal one of understanding his doctrine. If logical fallacies
are in any sense or degree irrelevant to the value of a philosophy,
it is nevertheless a method of studying a philosophical work which is
not without its value, to square it with logical principles. When
the philosophy under criticism is already a classic, the omission of
appreciative comment needs no apology, just because the merit of the
work is beyond dispute. On Platonism and on Kantism much valuable
light has been thrown in this severe way. In studies so occupied,
disquisition on the immortal inspiration of the vision bequeathed to
mankind in syllogisms which sometimes halt would not have enhanced the
value of the study.

When our philosopher is a contemporary, the case is different in that
then personal predilection and prejudice are without the regulation
imposed by historical perspective; and injustice, even negative
or privative, either to the living philosopher or to his living
antagonists, has a certain human import of which the conditions are
removed with mere temporal remoteness of the subject of study, when
history has placed him in a setting which includes an “after” as well
as a “before.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Professor A. D. Lindsay has pointed out[152] that, in one important
respect, Bergson’s genius is of the Kantian kind. It is capacity
for such interpretation of old problems that they become veritably
renewed. “It is a great and essential proof of cleverness or insight,”
said Kant, “to know how to ask reasonable questions.” Now, comments
Professor Lindsay (without suggesting any comparison in importance
between Kant and Bergson), there is this resemblance between them,
that much of the interest of Bergson’s work, as of Kant’s, consists
in statement and exposition of antinomies in philosophy. Like Kant’s,
Bergson’s philosophy is interesting because it is a new method, and, in
the same sense as Kant’s, is a critical philosophy, for it consists in
finding the main source of previous difficulties in uncriticized false
assumptions.

Such criticism of the question (“interpretation of the problem” I
called it above) is just the proper business of the philosopher. For,
every question is also an unconditional assertion. Falseness in this
implied assertion is a case of the fallacy of “many questions,” which,
accordingly, may be regarded as the philosopher’s first concern.

Bergson is a philosopher preeminently in this sense. He is a
philosopher also (in spite of the cavalier denial of Sir. E. Ray
Lankester)[153] in that he is a man with an articulate conviction
concerning the nature of being and of knowledge. In the aspersion
of Bergson’s thought by the above writer and by Mr. Hugh S. R.
Elliot,[154] there is a rancour which, in spite of much valid criticism
in detail, produces an impression of ill-regulated prejudice.

This impression is no more than fairly counterbalanced by the contrary
enthusiasm of such whole-souled votaries of Bergsonism as Edouard
LeRoy, William James and H. Wildon Carr.

“There is a thinker,” writes M. LeRoy, “who is deemed by acknowledged
philosophers worthy of comparison with the greatest.... Beyond any
doubt, and by common consent, Mr. Henri Bergson’s work will appear to
future eyes among the most characteristic, fertile and glorious of our
era. It marks a never-to-be-forgotten date in history; it opens up a
phase of metaphysical thought, it lays down a principle of development
the limits of which are indeterminable; and it is after cool
consideration, with full consciousness of the exact value of words,
that we are able to pronounce the revolution which it effects equal in
importance to that effected by Kant, or even by Socrates.”[155] It is
a “profoundly original doctrine.” And of endless fertility: “There is
no doctrine ... which is more open, and none which ... lends itself to
further extension.” Again: “... a doctrine which admits of infinite
development ... a work of such profound thought that the least passing
example employed takes its place as a particular study.”[156] And so on
_ad libitum_.

These are the glowing words of an ardent disciple (even though not a
pupil) and may be expected to be not, after all, altogether regulated
by a “full consciousness of the exact value of words.” Such phrases
as “worthy of comparison with the greatest,” “beyond any doubt,” “by
common consent,” are pleasantly vague, and should not offend any
judgment that is not literal in season and out of season. As to the
Bergsonian “revolution,” it should offend no one at all who can put up
with an expression of purely speculative relish. So far, on the other
hand, as this revolution is accomplished fact in the prime of our
philosopher’s middle age, the mention of Socrates and Kant does savour
of the ornate!

Bergson is at least preeminent over all other living philosophers as
the expression of a very revolutionary _Zeitgeist_. The generation
of Taine and Renan (LeRoy goes on to say) was characterized by the
positivistic presumption that any object whatever could be ‘inserted in
the thread of one and the same unbroken connection.’ But rationalistic
arrogance has never failed to arouse an answering voice of protest and
dissent; and of our own generation such anti-intellectualism is one
of the controlling ideas. It is primarily the reactionary conviction
that the analytic method of philosophy is abstract and empty. It is,
says LeRoy, a demand for “_complete_ experience, anxious to neglect
no aspect of being nor any resource of mind.” “Everything is regarded
from the point of view of life, and there is a tendency more and more
to recognize the primacy of spiritual activity.” “That the attitude
and fundamental procedure of this new spirit are in no way a return to
skepticism or a reaction against thought cannot be better demonstrated
than by this resurrection of metaphysics, this renaissance of idealism,
which is certainly one of the most distinctive features of our epoch.”
“But ... we wish to think with the whole of thought, and go to the
truth with the whole of our soul ... And what is that, really, but
realism? By realism I mean the gift of ourselves to reality, the work
of concrete realization ... to live what we think and think what we
live. But that is positivism, you will say; certainly it is positivism.
But how changed! For, from considering as positive only that which can
be an object of sensation or calculation, we begin by treating the
great spiritual realities with this title.”

“A new philosophy was required to answer this new way of looking at
things. Already, in 1867, Ravaisson, in his celebrated _Report_, wrote
these prophetic lines: ‘Many signs permit us to forsee in the near
future a philosophical epoch of which the general character will be the
predominance of what may be called spiritualist realism or positivism,
having as generating principle the consciousness which the mind has in
itself of an existence recognized as being the source and support of
every other existence, being none other than its action.’

“... What Ravaisson had only anticipated, Mr. Bergson himself
accomplishes, with a precision which gives body to the impalpable and
floating breath of first inspiration, with a depth which renews both
proof and theses alike, with a creative originality which prevents the
critic who is anxious for justice and precision from insisting on any
researches establishing connection of thought.”

“... Mr. Bergson has contributed more than anyone else to awaken
the very tendencies of the _milieu_ in which his new philosophy
is produced, to determine them and make them become conscious of
themselves.”[157]

In the new and significant relation which LeRoy and others find in
Bergson to motives of thought so distinct as idealism, realism, and
positivism, he is a writer of the fertility of genius; in the skill of
his transfusion of these motives into a type of conception underlying a
very deep and widely extended tendency of the age, he is the foremost
expression of that tendency. In a very limited way, only, can such
enthusiasm as LeRoy’s, in a mind of his excellent discernment, be
reasonably discounted. Trimmed of all its abounding fervours its
fighting weight is still sufficiently impressive: how resonant to
motives and convictions of actually controlling interest that mind
must be which can elicit such response, needs no better proof than the
response itself. No one else is so well attuned as Bergson to that
demand for complete experience which, if anything, is the spirit of
our time. No one else has carried so far in theory the possibilities
of an intense instinctive living, as the answer to the riddle of the
universe. What can be said for instinct as an organ of philosophy,
Bergson has said.

All philosophers of immediacy hold Bergson as chief. Carr, like LeRoy,
thinks Bergson’s doctrine as momentously original as those of the
greatest classics. “Great scientific discoveries,” he writes,[158] “are
often so simple that the greatest wonder about them is that humanity
has had to wait so long for them.” Thus with Berkeley’s “_esse est
percipi_” and Kant’s autonomy of the intellectual categories. And
equally so with Bergson’s interpretation of reality as life, “living
creative evolution,” as distinct both from solid matter and thinking
mind.

James, while others find quite determinate differences between him
and Bergson, was far less cognizant, himself, of differences than of
agreement. He was one of the keenest of Bergsonians, and regarded
himself, certainly with a great deal of genial modesty, as a follower,
a disciple. “... if I had not read Bergson,” he says,[159] “I should
probably still be blackening endless pages of paper privately, in
the hope of making ends meet that were never meant to meet ... It
is certain that without the confidence which being able to lean
on Bergson’s authority gives me, I should never have ventured to
urge these particular views of mine ... In my opinion he has killed
intellectualism definitively and without hope of recovery.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The quantity and quality of the study of Bergson’s problems by others,
which his own treatment of them has stimulated, is already an enviable
monument to that best quality of philosophic genius in his work, its
fertility of suggestion. Speaking, as the present writer must, from
the point of view of critical reaction, the value of Bergson is indeed
incalculable. This is no conventional phrase. His theoretical opponent
is almost inclined to feel that the stimulus which Bergson’s lucid
exposition affords, to a mind of contrary conviction, to understand
itself, must be a more precious good even than the quickening which his
followers so eloquently confess.

The fact is that this eloquence is always more than eloquence; it
is a fervour almost like religious fervour. Witness the words just
quoted from James. Every true Bergsonian testifies in the same tone.
Thus LeRoy:[160] “Mr. Bergson’s readers will undergo at almost every
page they read an intense and singular experience. The curtain drawn
between ourselves and reality, enveloping everything, including
ourselves, in its illusive folds, seems of a sudden to fall, dissipated
by enchantment, and display to the mind depths of light till then
undreamt, in which reality itself, contemplated face to face for the
first time, stands fully revealed. The revelation is overpowering, and,
once vouchsafed, will never afterwards be forgotten.

“Nothing can convey to the reader the effects of this direct and
intimate mental vision. Everything which he thought he knew already
finds new birth and vigor in the clear light of morning; on all hands,
in the glow of dawn, new intuitions spring up and open out; we feel
them big with infinite consequences, heavy and saturated with life.
Each of them is no sooner blown than it appears fertile forever. And
yet there is nothing paradoxical or disturbing in the novelty. It is a
reply to our expectation, an answer to some dim hope....

“... whether, in the long run, we each of us give or refuse complete
or partial adhesion, all of us at least have received a regenerating
shock, an internal upheaval ... henceforth a new leaven works and
ferments in us; we shall no longer think as we used to think.” As for
the attitude of mind proper to bring to the reading of Bergson, “where
the end is to understand rather than to judge, criticism ought to take
second place. It is more profitable to attempt to feel oneself into the
heart of the teaching, to relive its genesis, to perceive the principle
of organic unity, to come at the mainspring. Let our reading be a
course of meditation which we live.”

And Gaston Rageot: “... the reading of a work of Bergson’s requires at
the very beginning a sort of inner catastrophe; not everyone is capable
of such a logical revolution.”[161] A little further on he speaks of
this preparation of the mind to receive the Bergsonian doctrine as
“_cette volte-face psychologique_.”

Conversion to Bergsonism, indeed, suggests religious conversion.
Compare James’ words with the above. “... if, as Bergson shows, [the
conceptual or discursive form of reality] cannot even pretend to reveal
anything of what life’s inner nature is or ought to be; why, then we
can turn a deaf ear to its accusations. The resolve to turn the deaf
ear is the inner crisis or ‘catastrophe’ of which [M. Rageot] spoke
... [This] comes very hard. It is putting off our proud maturity of
mind and becoming again as foolish little children in the eyes of
reason. But difficult as such a revolution is, there is no other way, I
believe, to the possession of reality.”[162]

Is not this experience very suggestive of the “regeneration” of
Christianity? I think it is, indeed; and I think this fact is
suggestive of the essential nature of Bergsonism. One may turn a deaf
ear to reason, one may execute a _volte-face psychologique_; but,
whatever the rewards, it seems unlikely (to the unregenerate, of
course!) that among them will be included a better comprehension of the
_meaning_ of reality.




FOOTNOTES:

[92] _Creative Evolution_ p. 176. I have italicized “reflecting” and
“object” to indicate the contradiction of “instinct.” And since, for
Bergson, intuition is philosophic consciousness, this reflectiveness
which he imputes to it is no accident, no inadvertence. Intuition must,
indeed, in order to be philosophic, be reflective; that is to say, it
must absolutely contradict its own nature. (In all of the references
to Bergson’s works, the pages mentioned are those of the English
translation.)

[93] See especially _Creative Evolution_, pp. 191-2 and 266.

[94] Cf. R. B. Perry’s _Present Philosophical Tendencies_, the first
two sections of Chapter XI.

[95] J. W. Scott, _Pessimism of Bergson, Hibbert Journal_. XI. 90-116.
See also below p. 94.

[96] _Creative Evolution_, p. xi.

[97] _Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods._ Volume
V. No. 22

[98] Cf. the second sentence of the present essay.

[99] _Henri Bergson: The Philosophy of Change_, p. 14.

[100] This title has been given to the English translation of the
_Essai sur les donnes_, etc.

[101] Possibly this representation of Leibniz’s thought requires a
word of explanation. Leibniz expresses the nature of reality in terms
of force, on one hand, and of consciousness on the other. The monad or
elemental reality is a unit of perception and also a unit of force.
It is a living unit; as in Bergsonism, reality is life, though life
in Leibniz’s philosophy is ultimately plural instead of a simple
impetus. It is true that will is not a characteristic Leibnizian term,
but existence is always, I think, conceived by him very clearly as
_conation_. The self-realization of the monad is at the same time an
intensification of its perceptiveness and of its dynamic. Cf. the
following passages from Rogers’ _Student’s History of Philosophy_,
pp. 307-8: “Leibniz was led by various motives to substitute, for
extension, _power of resistance_, as the essential quality of
matter.... But when, instead of extension, we characterize matter as
_force_, a means of connection [between matter and mind] is opened up.
For force has its analogue in the conscious life; corresponding to the
activity of matter is conscious activity or will. Indeed, are there any
positive terms in which we can describe the nature of force, unless we
conceive it as identical with that conscious activity which we know
directly in ourselves?” This activity, then, “Is at bottom, when we
interpret it, a spiritual or perceptual activity.” In short, it is will.

Leibniz is properly regarded as the first modern spiritualist.
Leibnizian matter is real, if you like, but then it is continuous, and
of essentially identical nature, with spirit. Matter is spirit in a
low stage of development. Bergson has no such clear and unambiguous
conception of matter as this, when you consider the whole or his
doctrine; but there are passages in Bergson which might almost have
been written by Leibniz himself. For instance: ... “if, in fact, the
humblest function of spirit is to bind together the successive moments
of the duration of things, if it is by this that it comes into contact
with matter and by this also that it is first of all distinguished from
matter, we can conceive an infinite number of degrees between matter
and fully developed spirit--a spirit capable of action which is not
only undetermined, but also reasonable and reflective.” (_Matter and
Memory_, pp. 295-6.)

[102] There is a good discussion of this point in an article reviewing
the _Essai_, by L. Levy-Bruhl, in the _Revue Philosophique_, Vol. XXIX
(1890), pp. 513-538.

[103] Cf. below, pp. 57, 58.

[104] Pages 72, 73, 97. Professor Perry’s analysis of the conception of
immediacy (_Present Philosophical Tendencies_, Chapter X) has a result
that is similar in principle to the above.

[105] _Op. cit._, p. 525.

[106] _Time and Free Will_, pp. 118-119.

[107] But Bergson apparently does not see that even the word
“interpenetrate” falls to express anything radically different
in temporal “multiplicity” from a certain character of spatial
multiplicity. Cf. pp. 62, 101. In this, as in all its argument,
intuitionism arguing is inevitably intuitionism contradicting itself.
It is ineffable philosophy (see _Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and
Scientific Methods_, Vol. IV, p. 123.)

[108] The living ego is a fact-in-the-accomplishing. You cannot really
discourse about it! If psychology ever seems to manage this (and if
this present book of Bergson’s seems to manage it), the ego discoursed
about is, in that fact, proven to be not the concrete and living ego at
all, but the impersonal and objective one.

[109] The attitude, that is, of intuition, which we have called the
temporal attitude. The terms “spatial,” “logical,” “conceptual,”
applied here so often to the word “thought,” are epithets of thought
generally. There is no thought, in any meaning of the word more
specific than “consciousness,” that is not logical, conceptual and
spatial in this Bergsonian sense.

If we cannot conceptualize our psychic facts, we cannot think them,
then--the meaning is the same. But if we say that anything (which we
name and, in the saying, define and think) is unnamable, indefinable
and cannot be thought, we contradict ourselves. The doctrine, if true,
must mean something that is not a self-contradiction. Does it mean
that what we name and discourse about is only the spatialized symbol
of the psychic fact? There can be little doubt. I think, that this is
Bergson’s meaning; but then the psychic fact is of such a nature as
to be symbolized; and the distinction between a symbol and a name, by
virtue of which a thing which can be symbolized may not be namable,
requires explanation.

[110] _Present Philosophical Tendencies_, pp. 232-4.

[111] Pp. 42, 43. Cf. also below, p. 93.

[112] _Op. cit._, p. 128.

[113] _Time and Free Will_, p. 98.

[114] _Time and Free Will_, p. 113.

[115] Cf. above, p. 58.

[116] In order to give any meaning to the term “compenetrating”
or “interpenetration” (which I take to be mutually equivalent, in
Bergson’s use), I am compelled to interpret them as synonymous with
the “compactness” of a continuum--as synonymous. In fact, with
“continuity.” Bergson does not make clear how these terms can mean
anything else (cf. below, p. 101.)

[117] Bergson himself, of course, is perfectly aware--_in other
connections_--of the continuity of space!

[118] _Creative Evolution_, p. 1.

[119] _Ibid._, p. 4.

[120] _Ibid._, p. 208.

[121] _Ibid._, p. 248.

[122] _Ibid._, p. 247.

[123] _Jour. Phil. Psy. and Sci. Meth._, Vol. V, No. 22.

[124] _Creative Evolution_, p. 251.

[125] _Ibid._, p. 269.

[126] Cf. Perry’s comment, _Present Philosophical Tendencies_, p. 235.

[127] _Creative Evolution_, p. 175.

[128] _Ibid._, p. 144.

[129] _Ibid._, pp. 176, 177.

[130] _Matter and Memory_, pp. 6, 7.

[131] _Ibid._, p. 8.

[132] _Ibid._, p. 10.

[133] Hugh S. R. Elliot’s _Modern Science and the Illusions of
Professor Bergson_, pp. 98 ff.

[134] _Une theorie nouvelle de la liberte (Les donnees immediates)_, in
the _Revue Philosophique_, Vol. XXIX (1890), pp. 361-392.

[135] _Op. cit._, p. 368.

[136] The feeling of guilt, and, so, of responsibility and freedom, can
be crushing in dreams, as anyone knows who is given to appearing in
dream public indecently clothed, or not clothed at all.

[137] _Time and Free Will_, p. 158.

[138] _Matter and Memory_, p. x: also an article entitled _Le
paralogisme psycho-physiologique_ in the _Revue de Metaphysique et
de Morale_, Vol. XII (1904), pp. 895-908. This article is also in
the _Rapports et comptes rendus du deuxieme congres international de
philosophie_, 1905, Part I.

[139] The causal relation between mental and cerebral states--_i. e._
interaction--would be an alternative “condition of freedom;” but this
relation is included in Bergson’s denial of any sort of correspondence
or equivalence (such as the quantitative equivalence of causation)
between states of brain and states of mind.

[140] _Time and Free Will_, p. 34.

[141] _Ibid._, p. 172.

[142] _Ibid._, p. 208.

[143] _Ibid._, p. 215.

[144] _Time and Free Will_, p. 83.

[145] _Present Philosophical Tendencies_, Chapter X, section 6.

[146] _A Pluralistic Universe_, p. 236. Quoted from Professor Perry’s
work, named above.

[147] _Creative Evolution_, p. 3.

[148] The analogy holds even in the oppositeness of direction in which
the evanishment, in the limiting cases, occurs (cf. above, pp. 72, 80).

[149] Cf. Perry’s analysis of subjective privacy, in Chapter XII of
_Present Philosophical Tendencies_.

[150] _Time and Free Will_, p. 88.

[151] _Some Problems of Philosophy_, p. 10.

[152] _The Philosophy of Bergson_, pp. 1, 2, 3.

[153] _Modern Science and the Illusions of Professor Bergson_, pp. vii,
viii.

[154] _Op. cit., passim._

[155] _The New Philosophy of Henri Bergson_, pp. 1 and 2.

[156] _Ibid._, pp. 120, 230.

[157] _Op. cit._, pp. 128 ff.

[158] _Henri Bergson: The Philosophy of Change_, p. 12.

[159] _A Pluralistic Universe_, pp. 214, 215.

[160] _Op. cit._, pp. 3, 4, 5, 6.

[161] _Revue Philosophique_, Ann. 32, No. 7 (July 1907), p. 85.

[162] _Op. cit._, pp. 272-3.




  BULLETIN OF THE UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
  HUMANISTIC STUDIES

  _Vol. I_          _May 15, 1914_          _No. 3_


  BROWNING AND
  ITALIAN ART AND ARTISTS

  BY

  PEARL HOGREFE, A. M.

  _Instructor in Mansfield College, Mansfield, Louisiana_


  LAWRENCE, MAY, 1914
  PUBLISHED BY THE UNIVERSITY




  To G. A. L.

  WHO MADE POSSIBLE MY
  COLLEGE AND UNIVERSITY TRAINING




PREFACE


This paper has been prepared with the understanding that while much has
been printed concerning a few individual art poems of Browning, such as
_Abt Vogler_, _Andrea del Sarto_ and _Fra Lippo Lippi_, no complete,
systematic survey of the place of Italian art in Browning’s text has
appeared; and in the belief that such a survey might be worth while.

Much of Browning’s treatment of art is of course omitted in the
discussion; for he introduces art data from other countries than Italy,
and has much to say of the nature and purpose of art in general.

Within the limits chosen, the purpose has been to make a practically
complete survey for each of the five fine arts, sculpture, music,
poetry, architecture and painting, in the order here given. The attempt
has also been made, based on data from letters and biographies, to
trace to some extent the chronological perspective of Browning’s
interest in the individual arts, and to indicate the apparent sources
of that interest. Chapter VII deals with “comparative aesthetics”
(within the limits of our title), the poetic values Browning finds in
the arts, the causes determining the relative emphasis upon each art,
and the relations of these data to Browning’s dominant concern as a
poet--human personality.

That the study has been brought to its present form is due, in part,
to help and encouragement given by Professor S. L. Whitcomb. The
manuscript has been carefully read by Professor D. L. Patterson and
Professor Margaret Lynn. The former has given valuable suggestions
concerning the historical aspects of the paper, and the latter,
helpful criticism based on her special knowledge of Browning’s text.
To these three instructors in the University of Kansas, and to all
others who have given assistance, including fellow students, a grateful
acknowledgement of indebtedness is here made.

                                PEARL HOGREFE.
  Mansfield, Louisiana,
    May 1, 1914.




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER I
  Browning’s General Interest in Art.

     I. Subject Matter of Browning’s Poems                      9
    II. Interest in Music                                      10
   III. Relation to Painting                                   10
    IV. Relation to Sculpture                                  12
     V. Significance of the Preceding Sections                 12
    VI. Time Spent in Italy                                    13
   VII. English Knowledge of Italian Art in Browning’s Time    13
  VIII. Non-English Themes and Settings in General             14
    IX. A Quantitative Statement                               14


  CHAPTER II
  Italian Sculpture in the Poems of Browning.

     I. General Statement                                      15
    II. Historical Scope                                       16
   III. Poetic Functions of the References to Sculpture        17
    IV. Source of Browning’s Knowledge                         22


   CHAPTER III
   Italian Music in the Poems of Browning.

     I. General Statement                                      23
    II. Catholic Hymns                                         23
   III. Poetic Functions of the References to Music            24
    IV. Lack of Modern Italian References                      26
     V. Conformity to Facts                                    27
    VI. Source of Browning’s Knowledge                         27


   CHAPTER IV
   Italian Poetry in the Poems of Browning.

     I. General Statement                                      29
    II. Predominance in Early Poems                            29
   III. Sordello                                               30
    IV. The Imaginary Poets                                    30
     V. The Italian as the Type of Failure                     31
    VI. Italian Men of Letters: Dante                          32
   VII. Other Real Writers                                     33
  VIII. Browning’s Knowledge of Italian Literature             33
    IX. Browning’s Interest in Italian Literature              34


   CHAPTER V
   Italian Architecture in the Poems of Browning.

     I. General Statement                                      35
    II. Source of Browning’s Knowledge                         36
   III. Importance of Architecture in the Poems                37
    IV. Comparison with Other Writers                          38
     V. Architecture and Personality                           39


   CHAPTER VI
   Italian Painting in the Poems of Browning.

     I. General Statement                                      40
    II. Extent of Browning’s Knowledge                         40
   III. Irregular Distribution of References                   41
    IV. Sources of the Poems                                   42
     V. Poetic Functions of the References to Painting         44
    VI. Conformity to History                                  47


   CHAPTER VII
   General Comparisons: Browning and the Fine Arts of Italy.

     I. Poetic Function and Method                             48
    II. Amount of Material Used from Each of the Fine Arts     49
   III. Personality and the Arts                               52
    IV. Browning as the Poet of Humanity                       54


   APPENDIX

     I. Poems Containing Reference to Italian Art              55
    II. Tabulation of References to Individual Arts:
          Sculpture                                            56
          Music                                                58
          Poetry                                               60
          Architecture                                         61
          Painting                                             66

  Index                                                        75




