CHAPTER III

DOCTRINE OF FREEDOM


The fallacy of conceptualism, which, as Bergson conceives it, is
to substitute space for time as the form of mental existence, has
been discussed in the first chapter of _Time and Free Will_ in the
aspect of applying intensive magnitude, and in the second chapter,
numerical multiplicity, to psychic facts. It is the same fallacy
which is discussed in the third chapter, in the aspect of applying to
them the conception of determinate, causal organization. The outcome
of the book is thus that the problem of freedom is just the problem
of conceptualism, a problem of philosophic method. This book, _Time
and Free Will_, is a manual of instruction for knowing the reality
of mental existence; and its object is the _practical_ object of
indicating the attitude necessary for that purpose. There are two
possible attitudes, that of space and that of time, or that of
conception and that of intuition. The conceptual is the attitude taken
by philosophy universally, to be sure; which explains the futility of
all extant discussions of the “persistent problems of philosophy.” It
is clear, for instance, Monsieur Bergson thinks, that this attitude
gives rise, in an automatic and inevitable way, to the problem of
freedom--that is, that there would be no such problem but for this
false cognitive attitude;--and at the same time that by originating in
this unhappy way the problem is necessarily a pseudo-problem, cannot
be stated without contradiction. For when you regard mental facts in
the spatial or conceptual way, the question automatically arises, how
are these facts causally related with other spatial facts? It is a
contradiction because by “these” facts you mean non-spatial facts,
which, in the nature of causation, can not be causally related with
spatial facts, but which, the question presupposes, are so related.
Such is the real meaning of the traditional problem of freedom.
The solution, says Bergson, is to cease thinking spatially of that
which is temporal; take the other attitude. Once you have done so,
the problem vanishes; the causal relation is by definition a spatial
relation, and there are no longer two spatial terms to be related.
Such determinism is the associationistic conception of mind as an
assemblage of distinct, coexistent elements of which the strongest
exerts a preponderant influence on the others. Their organization is
a mechanical system, and their operations obey the laws of mechanical
causation.

As relative (_i. e._ quantitative) intensity is to absolute,
qualitative intensity, as juxtaposited multiplicity is to
interpenetrating multiplicity, so is determinate organization to
organization by free evolution. The categories magnitude, number and
cause apply to space. The difference, for Bergson, between space and
time is, as we have seen, so absolute that it hardly expresses his
theory aright to say that to the above three characters of space
three temporal characters _correspond_. Reason seems lacking for any
correspondence whatever. This is certain, at any rate: that when
intellect makes time an object, and sees it greater or less, divisible
and regularly consequential, three things are true about the real,
non-objective nature of time, each of which truths manifests itself
to intellect, but wrongly, erroneously. Moreover, it is plainly by
reasoned, analytic discourse that Bergson discovers that the above
intellectual manifestations of time’s essence are false. One discovers,
furthermore, by this conceptual process, just how they are false, and
corrects them with a result so conceptually precise and intelligible
that, instead of these three characters falsely spatial, other three
are determined as truly temporal. Instead of magnitude, quality has
in this way been substituted; instead of multiplicity, indivisible
variousness. For cause, the last chapter of the _Essai_ substitutes
freedom.

We should now be well prepared for divining the nature of the freedom
which is consciousness, or more generally, life. The organization of
the facts of a given consciousness is such that the person is focally
entire in any one of them, even as the entire body functions in each
of its functions (cf. page 20). The determinate type of organization
is analogous to the mechanically actuated manikin, not to the natural
man, even though those fragments which build up the structure of the
associationist soul are forces; for these forces are mutually distinct
parts of the soul, whose union in it, and so whose interaction,
depends on some principle extrinsic to any of them and is thus wholly
determined from without. In the developmental type of organization, on
the contrary, the _wholeness_ of action is its freedom, rather than
independence of what is not itself. Although such independence seems to
belong to it, as well, what Bergson is interested to emphasize about
the freedom of the free action is that it is the expression of the
entire person.

In the domain of life, there is no identity, for there is no
permanence--“the same does not remain the same,” as Bergson puts it.
The ego is not the same ego in any two moments; it is not the same ego
that deliberates from moment to moment; and two contradictory feelings
that move it are never respectively self-identical in two moments.
Indeed, if the case were otherwise, a decision would never be made; the
equilibrium of the opposing feelings would never be resolved. Merely
by the fact that the person has experienced a feeling, he is modified
when a second feeling comes. The feelings are the continually modified
ego itself, a dynamic series of states that interpenetrate, reinforce
each other and result in a free act by a natural evolution, because it
emanates from the entire person.

Such is the character of the free act, a very intelligible character,
it would seem, a character lending itself tractably enough to verbal
definition, that is, conceptual definition, as a certain relation
of act to agent. Yet it must immediately be added that what seems
so intelligible and so conceptual an explication of this “certain
relation”--what is contained in the two paragraphs preceding--is not
regarded by the author as a definition of freedom. It seems that there
is a distinction between the formulation of a conception on one hand,
and a definition, on the other, though Bergson does not elucidate this
distinction explicitly, and I have had to give up the attempt. The
distinction is evidently of crucial importance, nevertheless. “We can
now formulate our conception of freedom,” says the author, on page 219
of _Time and Free Will_. “Freedom is the relation of the concrete self
to the act which it performs. This relation is indefinable just because
we _are_ free. For we can analyze a thing, but not a process; we can
break up extensity, but not duration. Or, if we persist in analyzing
it, we unconsciously transform the process into a thing, and duration
into extensity ... and, as we have begun by, so to speak, stereotyping
the activity of the self, we see spontaneity settle down into inertia
and freedom into necessity. Thus, any positive definition of freedom
will ensure the victory of determinism.”

The attempt is therefore unwisely made by indeterminists to define
freedom by meeting determinists on their own ground when the latter
turn the question of freedom into considerations of the relations of
the voluntary act to its antecedents, characterizing voluntary activity
as essentially foreseeable before, or apodictically intelligible after
the fact. When indeterminists permit themselves to be thus ambushed,
they commit themselves to the support of determinism, by accepting
the deterministic postulate, in the one case that “foreseeable” has
intelligible meaning applied to psychic states, which it has not; or,
in the other case, that willed acts are intelligible both before and
after the fact.

The determinist, that is,--to take the second case first--professes
that an act depends in a mechanical way upon certain antecedents. The
indeterminist contends that the same antecedents could have resulted
in either of several different acts, equally possible. Defenders and
opponents of freedom agree in making a kind of mechanical oscillation
between two points precede the action. I choose A. The indeterminists
say, You have deliberated; then B was possible. The determinists
reply, I have chosen; therefore I had some reason to do so, and when
B is declared equally possible, this reason is forgotten; one of the
conditions of the problem is ignored. Both represent the activity by
a deliberative route which divides. Call the point of the division
O; then the divisions of the forked line OA and OB symbolize the
two divisions which abstraction distinguishes within the continuous
activity, of which A is the termination. But while determinists take
account of everything, and find that the route MOA has been traversed,
their opponents ignore one of the data with which they have constructed
the figure; and, after tracing the lines OA and OB, which ought to be
united if they are to represent the progression of the ego’s activity,
they make this progression go back to O and begin oscillating again!

The trouble with both these solutions, Bergson says, is that they
presuppose an achieved deliberation and resolution, representable in
space by a geometrical figure. The question, Could the ego, having
traversed the route MO and decided on A, have chosen B? is nonsense:
to put such a question is to affirm the possibility of adequately
representing time by space, succession by simultaneity. It is to
attribute to the figure traced the value of an image and not merely
of a symbol. Figures represent things, not progressions: how shall a
figure furnish the least indication of the concrete motion, of the
dynamic progression by which the deliberation results in the act? The
defenders of freedom say, The route is not yet traced; therefore one
can take any direction. To which we reply, You can speak of a route,
in such a connection, only after the action is accomplished, and then
it has been traced. The determinists say, The route has been traced
_thus_; therefore its possible direction was only that particular
direction. To which we reply, Before the route was traced there was no
direction, possible or impossible; there could, as yet, be no question
of a route. In its lowest terms this merely means: The act, once
accomplished, is accomplished; and the argument of the determinists:
The act, before being accomplished, was not as yet an act. The question
of freedom is not touched, because freedom is a shade or quality of the
act itself, not a relation of this act with what it is not nor with
what it can be. Deliberation is not oscillation in space; it is dynamic
progression, in which the ego and the motives are in a continual
becoming, as living beings.

Indeterminists, Professor Bergson says, must beware, again, of arguing
against the prevision of voluntary acts. Once more, this is not because
prevision of a voluntary act is possible, but because there is no sense
in the phrase. If Paul knew all the conditions under which Peter acts,
his imagination would relive Peter’s history. He must pass through
Peter’s very own psychic states, to know with precision their intensity
and their importance in relation to his other states. The intensity,
in fact, is the peculiar quality of the feeling itself. Now, to know
_all_ the antecedents of the act would bring you to the act itself,
which is their continuation, and not merely their result, and above
all in no way separate from them. To relive Peter’s history is just to
become Peter--that is the only way Paul could conceivably “know all the
antecedents” of the act in question. There is no question of predicting
the act, but simply of acting. Knowledge of the antecedents of the act
without knowledge of the act is an absurdity, a contradiction. The
indeterminists can mean nothing, by such a contention as this, but
that the act is not an act until it is acted--which is hardly worth
meaning;--and the determinists can mean only that the act, once acted,
is acted--which is no better. The subject of freedom is beside the
point, in such a debate.

So the question of prevision comes to this: Is time spatial? You drew
Peter’s states, you perceived his life as a marking in space. You then
rubbed out, in thought, the part OA, and asked if, knowing the part
before O, you could have determined OA beforehand. That is the question
you put when you bring in Paul’s representation of the conditions (and
therefore their materialization) under which Peter shall act. After
having identified Paul with Peter, you make Paul take his former point
of view, from which he now sees the line MOA complete, having just
traced it in the rôle of Peter.

Prevision of natural phenomena has not the slightest analogy with that
of a voluntary act. Time, in scientific formulæ, is always and only
a number of simultaneities. The intervals may be of any length; they
have nothing to do with the calculation. Foreseeing natural phenomena
is making them present, or bringing them at least enormously nearer.
It is the intervals, the units themselves--just what the physicist
has nothing to do with--that interest the psychologist. A feeling
half as long would not be the same feeling. But when one asks if a
future action can be foreseen, one identifies physical time, which is
a number, with real psychological duration, which has no analogy with
number. In the region of psychological states there is no appreciable
difference between foreseeing, seeing and acting.

According to the mechanical law of causation, the same causes always
produce the same effects. But, in the region of psychic states, this
law is neither true nor false, but meaningless; for in this region
there is no “always:” there is only “once.” A repeated feeling is a
radically different feeling. It retains the same name only because
it corresponds to the same external cause, or is outwardly expressed
by analogous signs. It was just said that the ego is not the same
in any two moments of its history. It is modified incessantly by
the accumulation of its past. One’s character at any moment, is the
condensation of one’s past. Duration acts as a cause; but this temporal
or psychological causation has no more analogy with what is called
causation in nature than temporal variousness has with number, or
intensity with magnitude. A causality which is necessary connection
is, at bottom, identity; the effect is an expression of the cause, as
mathematical functions are expressions of each other. But no psychic
state has this virtual identity with, or mathematical reducibility to,
any other with which it would thus be in the “necessary” kind of causal
relation. Such effect is not given in the cause, but is absolutely new.

Time that has passed is an objective thing, and is representable by
space; time passing is a subjective process, and is not representable.
The free act is the actual passing of time; time in its passing is the
very stuff of the existence of freedom. Analyze an act, and you make
it a thing. Then its spontaneity is altered into inertia, its freedom
into necessity. Hence any definition of freedom makes it determinism.
But, though the analysis of the act and the definition of freedom
are illusory undertakings, the fundamental fact of freedom remains
unassailable by any argument.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bergson’s way of vindicating freedom is thus to find no case against
it. Of the positive sort, the only, and sufficient proof is appeal to
consciousness. Freedom is an immediate datum of consciousness.

This is confusing to anyone who cannot follow Bergson in his view
that subject and object, in actual intuitive consciousness, are
indistinguishable, identical. And this fusion of the poles of
consciousness while the nature of consciousness not merely suffers
nothing but even attains its apogee thereby, needs more justification
than Bergson has given it. Freedom is a datum of consciousness; but,
as undetermined, it must, on Bergson’s principles, be consciousness
itself--which, indeed, is plainly enough the teaching intended.
Freedom is consciousness, then, purely subjective. In what sense is
it a datum of consciousness? If it is a datum, is it not an object,
of consciousness? It seems a case where, in order to see, you musn’t
look, lest looking make what is purely subjective an object! This is
hardly the case of the fovea and the faint star, where looking _loses_
your object; for here, looking rather produces it where no object
belongs, or--perhaps one should say--transforms it. Your look, says
Gustave Belot,[134] congeals and immobilizes it, denatures it like the
Gorgon’s stare! It is knowable, says Bergson, only by being lived.
It is a feeling we have. But the trouble is that, to be _known_ as
undetermined, as freedom, to be even a feeling we have, it is back upon
our hands as a datum, as an object.

Before I comment in my own way on the Bergsonian view of freedom, I
wish to call to the attention of English readers the keen reaction of
this French critic of Bergson. Belot objects to the modest-seeming
statement that freedom is a feeling we have. Neither psychology,
he thinks, nor common sense, approves.[135] They establish, on the
contrary, a sensible difference between freedom, whatever it may be,
and the feeling we have of it--any feeling we can possibly have. Our
feeling of freedom is much less variable than our freedom. “We agree
not to attribute a veritable practical freedom to the dreaming man,
to the somnambulist, to the man affected with some mental disease.
Yet the man who, in dream, sees himself act, sees himself free in his
action; the somnambulist equally feels himself free and attributes to
himself, in his dream, a responsibility that we decline to put upon
him, and which he will reject, himself, when he wakes[136] ... The
furious madman must ordinarily feel himself free in the accomplishment
of a murder for which a tribunal will not consent to punish him. The
fact is, it suffices, in order that we should feel ourselves free, that
our acts should be in harmony with our ideas and our feelings. Now,
that may very well be, in the cases of the dreamer, the somnambulist,
the madman.... They would therefore feel themselves free. But they are
not free; for they only act from an incomplete consciousness; and a
great number of elements of their normal ego, which would permit the
revision, the correction, the inhibition, are lacking.” A glimmering
of the fact of one’s madness is a token of the only residuum there is
of freedom. “It is to conserve some freedom, to perceive that one no
longer is master of oneself.”

Bergson is alive to all this--sometimes, as when he says that the
freedom of a free action is its _entirety_, its expression of the
total personality. But Belot is quite justified in charging him with
forgetting it, for only by forgetting it could he conceive of freedom
as an immediate datum of consciousness. It is, indeed, far from the
case that our freedom is nothing but the feeling we have of it, or
that it is proportional to this feeling. What is so altered by the
determinist habit of mind, by the conceptual attitude toward will, is
not at all one’s feeling of freedom, but only one’s interpretation
of it. An immediate, spontaneous feeling, being prior to theory
and analysis, is safe from any influence from them. In the most
incorrigible determinist, consciousness of the wish, other things
equal, is exactly the same as in the most incorruptible indeterminist.

Precise determination of will is not only not contrary to freedom but
is indispensable to it. Minimizing the value of motive in activity is
loss, not gain, to freedom. The motive is what connects our act to
our whole personality, and makes it ours. Without this connection, we
are not free; its interruption is a limitation, not the condition,
of freedom. And indeed freedom is so limited by the mass of our
unreflecting impulses. Bergson is right in saying that we are rarely
free. But therefore he is wrong in saying that freedom is the mere
spontaneity of the ego.

In a certain passage[137] Bergson describes freedom in a way which
seems almost explicitly to deny the doctrine that it is the entirety of
will. Here it is a revolution of one part of the self against the rest,
far from emanating from the total self. And such revolution, just so
far as it is purely spontaneous, or arbitrary, is irresponsible instead
of free. Just so far, on the other hand, as it is not arbitrary, it
is determined. In fact, however, appearance of arbitrariness argues
nothing about determination except that one is ignorant about it.

In showing the absurdity of all argumentation for or against the
determination of a future voluntary act by present conditions, the
considerations offered by Bergson are almost perfect proof of such
determination. The reason we cannot think another’s thought without
disfiguring it is just that the conditions of the thought, and so of
the act, are not all reunited. The act, then, is supposed to depend
on these conditions. Now, an absolute present is a fiction; each
moment of the true duration of consciousness is a commencement and an
achievement. Determination is nothing but that intimate connection
of events which prevents us from isolating an absolute present. The
case of Peter and Paul then, proves only that foresight could not
be adequate to determination, not that determination is absent. The
inability of even the author of an act to foresee it is no criterion
of its freedom. Any free acts of our own that we do foresee, we foresee
as connected with our present state, as ours, in fact; it is that which
makes their freedom, but that supposes also their determination. This
foresight, it may be said, is always insufficient and imperfect. So
much the worse for freedom, not the better. It is thereby limited,
not made. There are, indeed, always events outside of us that baffle
our calculations, as well as unconscious tendencies, unperceived
forces within us, indistinctly developing beneath the reflective and
clear-seeing ego (Bergson calls this the superficial, Belot the higher
ego) which suddenly break out, rout it and upset it. Such civil war is
anything but freedom.

The uniqueness of psychic states, whether free or not, neither exempts
them from determination nor even differentiates them from physical
states. That a psychic state is not reproducible Bergson shows to be
because the past, incessantly accumulating and modifying itself, is
never the same in two moments. A clearer statement of the solidarity
of past and present--_i. e._ of determination--could not be made. It
may well be true that in the physical as well as in the moral world,
every individual is without counterpart; it is none the less a product
of nature, for its uniqueness; and, as a product of nature, determined,
in its own uniqueness, by nature. Among our most unique acts, the most
original are far from being the freest. The eccentricities of the
madman are more original than the sober doings of the rational, but
not so free. The more enlightened men are, the freer; but the more
they do and think the same thing. Their divergences come from their
ignorances and their unconsciousness, which are also the limits of
their freedom. It is the same with them as with nature: it is when it
produces monsters that it is most new, but it is then also that it has
been least free, most constrained in its doings.

Monsieur Bergson has not done away with psychological determinism; but
if he had, he would have hindered freedom rather than helped it. But
the problem is not purely psychological; it is psycho-physical. We are
at once body and consciousness. A freedom which were not exerted in the
outer world would be absolutely nominal and illusory; and in order to
manifest itself therein, it must be accompanied by physical processes.
These too, then, if determinism is contrary to freedom, must be exempt
from determination.

Bergson’s denial of psycho-physical parallelism[138] is no gain for
freedom. If no external effect is essentially involved in a volition,
the volition is impotent--which is surely not to be free. Nor would
it be characteristic of freedom to have activities going on in the
organism without the avowal of consciousness. So far as we do possess
such unconscious goings-on, we are absolutely passive to their
operation. Psycho-physiological parallelism[139] is a condition of
freedom, not its negation. Some sort of correspondence is necessary
to the feeling of freedom, and in that case freedom cannot dispense
with determinism in nature, at least. One might, perhaps, suppose a
preestablished harmony between a contingency (the moral world) and a
determinism (the physical); it would be easier to suppose it between
two determinisms; but between two contingencies--that is too much to
ask!

Suppose, then, the ability of mind to produce, veritably cause physical
modifications. Suppose an energy not subject to calculation. But how
shall we ever know such an energy in the external world? All that is
spatial is calculable, if number is derived from space. How could an
energy, then, be manifest in the physical universe, _i. e._ in space,
without being thereby subjected to the same forms of quantity and to
the requirements of calculation?

Bergson’s attempt to repudiate the problem of determinism, as a
pseudo-problem, results in his vacillation between the two sides of
the controversy. Sometimes he accepts the solidarity of our acts with
the rest of our conscious life, sometimes he denies it; which is to
vindicate freedom sometimes by determinism, sometimes by indeterminism.
In the beginning he founds freedom in the mutual penetration of the
states of consciousness; even sensation is a commencement of freedom,
because it embraces “the sketching and, as it were, prefiguring of the
future automatic movements;”[140] and the free act is defined as that
which “springs from the self”[141] without intervention of anything
strange. Then, little by little, the contrary thesis takes the upper
hand: the act of will becomes a _coup d’état_; “the successive moments
of real time are not bound up with one another;”[142] the dynamic
conception supposes “that the future is not more closely bound up
with the present in the external world than it is in our own inner
life.”[143] Bergson maintains, to be sure, that solidarity can be
admitted between the past and the present and denied between present
and future. Once the event happens it is indeed necessary that we
should be able to explain it, and we can always do so by plausible
reasons. But this connection is established after the fact for the
satisfaction of our discursive reason. The past is fixed, it cannot
_not have been_; it has become a _thing_, under the domain of the
understanding and of analysis. Whereas, at the moment of enactment,
the activity is a _process_, and so not capable of analysis. When the
route is traced, we can analyze its directions and windings, but it is
not traced in advance of being traced; it is the tracing that makes the
route, not the route that determines the tracing. You can explain what
is given, but there is no explaining what is not given.

Bergson, however, does not keep this point of view. The future, we have
just seen, is “prefigured” in the present. Then it is as necessary to
the feeling of our freedom to be able to connect our future to our
present in our decision, as to be able, once the act is accomplished,
to give account of it by reasons drawn from our consciousness.
Bergson’s thought vacillates this way because he attributes two
incompatible characters to the inner life, qualitative heterogeneity
and mutual penetration of its states. Grant the heterogeneity and
you have an infinitesimal dust, the very denial of connection and
penetration. If the states penetrate there are always two near enough
to each other in quality to form an identical whole, while they differ
only in degree, as two very near shades of the same color. But then
there is a quantitative, and so a homogeneous, aspect of the inner
life.




