CHAPTER II

BERGSON’S CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON


What, then, is called philosophic “method” and is distinguished
thereby from “doctrine,” is really, in fact, always the cardinal
principle of the _content_ of the philosophy in question, its
fundamental _doctrine_. If this doctrine is acceptable to reason,
if it is reasonable, logical principles must determine it. No
anti-intellectualist philosophy legitimately evades the rules of the
game of dialectic by the representation that it is a ‘method rather
than a doctrine.’ For this is the game that anyone plays who undertakes
to show, by reasonable discourse, why reality and knowledge conform
to a certain definition, or (the same mental procedure) why they do
not conform to other definitions. Since dialectic is just significant
discourse with a meaning to be judged, it may vary in form between
any degree of syllogistic baldness, at one extreme, and of suggestive
subtlety at the other. It is dialectic if it is constituted of
statements, explicit or implied, which relate to each other.

There is, therefore, I say, a misleading irrelevance in the
characterization which Bergson himself has set the fashion of
attributing to his philosophy, the characterization of it as rather a
method than a system of doctrine. A method implies a system, that is to
say an ordered conviction about the nature of reality and knowledge.
Such a system is essential to any meaning in Bergson’s method.

       *       *       *       *       *

Intellectualism in philosophy implies the conviction that the parts of
reality are connected together in thinkable ways; that a comprehensive
understanding of things as a connected system or unity is therefore
theoretically possible; if actually impossible, this is merely because
of the endlessness of relationships and the limitedness of any actual
thinker’s time and strength. But in fact even human finitude is no
obstacle to a comprehension of the principles of reality. Detail is
immaterial to the unity of such a view.

One of the sayings attributed to Professor James is that there
is one thing you can always pronounce with assurance, upon any
philosophical system, in advance of hearing a word of it, and that is
that it is false. This suggests at any rate, very well, the meaning
of philosophical anti-intellectualism, which implies the conviction
contradictory to intellectualism, to wit that the parts of reality are
not connected in thinkable ways.

The connectedness of the intellectualist’s universe may have any
degree of significance or casualness. A mere “and” may express much
of it.[94] Intellectualism may be as pluralistic in this sense as you
like, or as monistic. But if things are a universe in any such sense
that they are comprehensible in intellect’s discursive way, which
anti-intellectualism denies--on such a hypothesis anti-intellectualism
and intellectualism have commonly agreed that some principle is
embodied in this total comprehensibleness, a supreme induction,
which would constitute the final interpretation of any fact. Like
a master-key, it would open all the chambers of the many-mansioned
universe. Every philosopher, as a fact, has some controlling thought
which has the value, for him, of such a supreme principle. But always,
it seems, there are doors which the master-key will not unlock. It is
the conviction of intellectualism that this is because the maker of
the key has missed them, and so left them out of account in fashioning
it; while anti-intellectualism believes it is an illusion to see the
situation as a case of locks to be turned by a key, at all. Entrance
into possession of reality is otherwise conditioned, altogether; the
procedure, in consequence, is radically different from this. But it
is, I think, a true historical generalization that the success with
which a philosopher, of whatever method, avoids a supreme principle
of interpretation, corresponds exactly with the success with which
he avoids being a philosopher at all. I suppose Omar Khayyam and
Aristippus the Cyrenaic are two of the least unifying philosophers
of history; yet their philosophy, like that of any absolutist, can be
resumed in a single idea. Omar has uttered it in one of his own famous
sentences: “Oh take the cash, and let the credit go!”

Aside from the presence, in each, of a generative principle, there
is little enough in common between the anti-intellectualism of Omar
and that of Henri Bergson. If critics have been able to find seeds of
skepticism and of pessimism in Bergson,[95] these characters are at any
rate foreign to any intention visible in its author. No more positive
philosophy, in its intention, was ever composed. The positiveness of
its name, intuitionism, is altogether proper. Its significance, to be
sure, is sharply defined by its negative relation to intellectualism,
and therefore I stated it negatively above as the thesis that the parts
of reality are not connected in a thinkable way. But the intuitionist
would readily admit: if not in a thinkable way, then in no way,
evidently. And, again, if not connected at all, no more are the parts
of reality disconnected, since any disconnection between things is
only their particular mode of connection. The fact is, reality has no
parts, and that is just why intellect, which sees parts in everything,
is alien and blind to the true nature of reality. Still one may object
that intellect is itself a fact. What possible meaning can there be in
saying that any fact is alien to reality? As Bergson himself has said,
we swim in reality, and cannot possibly get clear of it. We cannot
talk, we cannot think, we cannot act about nothing.

The answer to this objection is the master principle of Bergson’s
metaphysics: reality is life. Knowledge is “sympathetic” living. If
intellect is real, so is every abstraction, _e. g._, the inside of your
hat. The inside and the hat itself are at any rate real in senses so
importantly different that “real” and “unreal” hardly exaggerate the
contrast. Intellect, says Bergson, is the cross-sectioning of reality.
There is no thickness, no concreteness in it. It exists as much in
inert matter as in consciousness; in fact, it exists in neither except
in the sense in which a surface can be said to exist in a solid body.
What is the surface _in itself_? Why, nothing; it is an abstract aspect
of the body. The body is real, but its aspects are not real, because
they do not constitute the body--no multiplication or addition of them
does so. No millions of surfaces make any thickness. In this sense the
surface is other than and alien to the real nature of the body. And so
other manifestations of intellect--space, juxtaposition, extension,
number, part out of part--have no existence, as the surface has none.

As facts, nevertheless, what are they? How are they facts? What is
their _raison d’ être_? Their _raison d’ être_ is a faculty life has,
the faculty of _action_. They are the ways in which life acts. They are
not concrete entities. In this, they are alien to the concreteness of
reality. Try to reconstruct reality out of such abstractions, and the
result is a construction like that of geometrical imagination. You have
constructed an abstract symbol of the reality, which symbol the mind,
preoccupied with its practical bias, can mistake for the reality only
because it is so preoccupied.

When we physically take apart and put together, our manual activity
has the same unreality of abstractness as that of our intellectual
analyses and syntheses. It is the latter outwardly expressed, intellect
externalized. Wherever we find life, we are experiencing reality. But
when this occurs, we are never analyzing nor synthesizing. The more one
divests himself of practical bias, and regards his object not as an
object for the realization of any possible activity of his own, but as
it is in itself--in proportion, that is, as one gets its character as
a case of life--those unreal, spatial aspects of it yield to an aspect
which has nothing in common with them. The parts of an anatomical
model, a _papier maché_ manikin, you may separate and put together
again. An organism, as such, a manifestation of life, could not be
dissected and recomposed in its living reality. What is it that makes
an organism alive, a true reality? This, that every so-called part has
a function which is so essential to the true function of the whole that
one is present or absent with the other. They coincide. How, then,
could you possibly dissect out a part of an organism? Once recognize,
what is unquestionable, that any function of it coincides in this
way with the function of the whole, and your analyzing operation is
prevented absolutely. Obey the rule that everything which contributes
at all to the function of the part shall be taken, and everything else
left, and you are in Shylock’s position after Portia’s judgment: if you
want the flesh you will have to take blood with it; but you are not
entitled to the blood. It is even more hopeless than that. It is not a
matter of skill with your hand. You cannot make the analysis mentally,
intellectually. It is not a matter of impairing or destroying the
function, of injuring or killing the organism. You cannot _begin_ the
operation, not even on the corpse. The first incision separates cells
whose functions were inseparably one, for there is no cell in the body
that is not in organic union with every other cell.

If there is nothing of the nature of mosaic composition in the living
structure, this fact is one with the fact that there is nothing
mechanical in its functioning. It is not actuated from without, as
every machine is actuated which is not alive; nor is its functioning,
like that of such machines, an assemblage of functions predetermined
so far as the machine itself is concerned--predetermined, that is to
say, except for intervention from without; unalterable, as unstartable,
without external cause. The character of living function is suggested
by the word “focalization.” There is a perfectly indivisible concert
of function throughout the organism, in every one of its infinite
varieties of activity. When the engineer reverses his engine, or
otherwise alters its mode of operation, what he really does is to
alter the structure of the machinery. The machinery has been specially
constructed with a view to unmaking and remaking its nature more or
less quickly and conveniently; that is, its parts can be displaced
and replaced with reference to each other. Some parts are “thrown out
of gear” and shifted back. _And then everything returns to its former
state._ Not so in life. The functioning of an organism never remains
quite the same in two consecutive instants. There is an incessantly
moving emphasis or focus in it. Now one of its potentialities of
function is primary or focal, now another. But none can ever cease
and then be resumed. In this case, to cease is not to be thrown out
of gear, but to die, to perish, to be annihilated. In every phase of
the life activity of the organism, all its functions are operative,
subsidiary and subservient in varying degrees to that one which for
the moment is the focus of all. Thus the organic or vital focus, in
its physiological aspect of activity and in its psychological aspect
of attention, is never at rest. The modulation is not like the sudden
transformations in a kaleidoscope. The evolutions do not take place
in the manner suggested by the phrase “Presto, change!” _Modulation_
is the word that describes the process. Or, as Bergson phrases it,
the change is continuous, incessant, an _interpenetrating flow_ of
processes, in which analysis can make no beginning and no separation;
in which analysis, in fact, is absolutely impotent. If the eye is
that which sees, the ear that which hears, and so on, it is really
the organism entire, and no special, locally differentiated part of
it that is the organ. Those so-called parts which, with our false
intellectualism, we name the eye or other organ, are, _in their
reality_, focal aspects of the entire organism, the organism seen with
a certain restriction or limitation of interest.

But, now, how can one make any discourse about, say, an animal
organism--indeed, how can this become an object of perception at
all--without its lending itself to that sort of division into real
parts which Bergson says is an intellectual falsification of its
true nature, and therefore not true knowledge of the thing? When I
look at a living body, do I not see it occupying space? Is it not,
then, measurable? Is not one such body larger than another? Suppose
cutting out parts of a body does alter or kill the organism: they can,
neverless, be cut out, and are therefore parts? If, after, and because
of, being cut out, they are then not parts of the _organism_ from which
they were cut, still, they are constituents of its volume. Surely, our
ordinary speech about this part and that part of our bodies, is not all
false?

Bergson’s answer is uncompromising: our ordinary perception and speech
does falsify the nature of reality, but (in spite of the apparent
paradox) _does not mislead_. For our ordinary perception and speech
have nothing to do with knowing. Perception is a different function
of life--it is action. Our percepts are the ways in which reality
can factor in our activities. Those dissected organs, you say, are
at least so much of the entire volume of the organism: but the words
are no sooner spoken than their falseness shows itself. If the
organism ever had volume, it certainly has not, now--neither volume
nor anything else. The fact is, the only meaning there is in its ever
possessing volume while it still exists, is just that you might enter
into activity with it in such and such ways--as that, for instance,
of hacking it up. Perception, our “virtual” or potential activity on
reality, is an abstract aspect of it; what it is in itself is another
matter, and the only knowledge of this is that sympathetic union with
it in which space and parts disappear in an “interpenetrating flow”
not of _things_ nor of parts, but of process, of ceaseless change. Now,
quality is just the fact of change, as anyone may test for himself by
introspection. Reality as it is in itself, therefore, the true nature
of reality, is quality. Relations are external views or aspects, no
multiplication of which makes any start at constituting a concrete
reality.

There is one more reflection on Bergson’s account of intellect, which,
like those made above, he anticipates and tries to meet, so far as it
seems an objection to denying cognitive validity to intellect. The
attempt at this point, however, is not very convincing. The point I
mean is this: The ways in which reality can factor in my activities
are _by that warrant_ true characters of reality. One may cheerfully
add: even as the inside of my hat is, after all, a true character of
my hat. For, if reality were different, it could not factor _so_ in
my activity--in other words, which would also be the words of plain
common sense, I should _perceive_ it differently, on Bergson’s own
conception of what it means to perceive. The situation is this: Reality
does, indeed, possess those interesting aspects of changing process
and undividedness which Bergson is so preoccupied with and which he
has brought to light with exquisite skill. This is one of two equally
important truths about reality. The other Bergson is simply blind
to, and that is that reality also possesses an aspect of permanence
and divisibility. Does this seem a contradiction? It is no more a
contradiction than that a curve is both convex and concave. It is not
only not a contradiction: each of these antipodally opposite aspects
of reality is absolutely indispensable to the very conception of
the other, just as concavity is indispensable to the conception of
convexity, east to the conception of west, right to the conception
of left-- and _vice versa_. This point is resumed below (pp. 77-9,
96). The object in view at present is to see how the philosopher’s
method is really his primary doctrine, in which object I am not in
controversy with anyone, so far as I know; but also to see how an
anti-intellectualist method depends upon a purely arbitrary, or rather
constitutional, psychological prepossession for a certain emphasis of
living.

I said that Bergson is entirely awake to the aptness of the objection
just raised to his account of intellect. In a sense, in certain
passages, he even seems to grant the truth of the contention. Action,
he acknowledges, for instance,[96] can be involved only with reality;
and consequently the forms of perception and the categories of
intellect (which are those forms rendered elaborately precise) “touch
something of the absolute.” Sound truth, assuredly! The fitness of
reality to enter as object into those active relationships which are
the perceptive and intellectual categories makes the categories as
genuinely own to the true, essential nature of objective reality as
to the nature of subjective intelligence. That the categorization of
reality depends on the real object’s being in relation to something
else than itself is nothing peculiar to this (the categorical)
character of reality. The same condition is common to every character
of reality. The qualitative aspect of reality, which Bergson usually
regards as the nature of reality “in itself,” depends no less than its
relational or categorical aspect on the relatedness of the object. For
the qualities of things are nothing but the differences they make--to
consciousness or to other things. Reality not in relation is simply
a phrase without a vestige of meaning. Reality “in itself” in such
a sense is merely nonsense. It would seem, therefore, as if Bergson
should account the intellectual mode of consciousness, which does
indeed “touch something of the absolute,” as knowledge of precisely the
same metaphysical status as a mode which touches anything else of the
absolute. It is one thing for a mode of consciousness to be uncongenial
or uninteresting to you or me; it is another for it to be invalid.
The uncongeniality of a mode of consciousness depends on personal
idiosyncrasy; the invalidity of a mode of consciousness depends on the
logical nature of being.

As a fact, however, perhaps because this preference between two aspects
of the nature of reality depends so obviously on personal bias instead
of logical principles, Bergson vacillates, in a hopelessly confused and
confusing way, all through his writings, between two conceptions of
reality. First, reality is of one nature, namely life, which is pure
quality, change, or duration (the four terms are actually synonyms to
Bergson), and knowledge of which can be only sympathetic intuition
of it, while intellect is merely “an appendage of action,” and not
knowledge at all. In the other conception reality is cleft into a
dualism more unutterably absolute than that of Descartes. Life is one
kind of reality; inert matter is the other. Intuition knows the former;
intellect really does _know_ the latter (‘touching something of the
absolute’), and knowledge is therefore not intuition only. Although
this vacillation confuses issues in every one of Bergson’s books, the
first conception is more characteristic, upon the whole, of _Time and
Free Will_ and of _Creative Evolution_; the other conception is pretty
consistently expounded in _Matter and Memory_. The sphere of intellect
is restricted; its cognitive validity is not explicitly denied within
this sphere, but only within the domain of life. To be sure, since
life exhausts reality, the sphere allotted to intellect is not real,
which would seem to imply that intellect fails to know. The validity of
intellectual consciousness is thus, in effect, denied equally in either
case. The only difference is that the denial is conscious and explicit
in one case, more or less unconsciously implied in the other.




