BOOK IV


I

Such was Socrates; so helpful under all circumstances and in every
way that no observer, gifted with ordinary sensibility, could fail to
appreciate the fact, that to be with Socrates, and to spend long time
in his society (no matter where or what the circumstances), was indeed
a priceless gain. Even the recollection of him, when he was no longer
present, was felt as no small benefit by those who had grown accustomed
to be with him, and who accepted him. Nor indeed was he less helpful to
his acquaintance in his lighter than in his graver moods.

Let us take as an example that saying of his, so often on his lips:
"I am in love with so and so"; and all the while it was obvious the
going-forth of his soul was not towards excellence of body in the bloom
of beauty, but rather towards faculties of the soul unfolding in virtue.
(1) And these "good natures" he detected by certain tokens: a readiness
to learn that to which the attention was directed; a power of retaining
in the memory the lessons learnt; and a passionate predilection for
those studies in particular which serve to good administration of a
house or of a state, (2) and in general to the proper handling of
man and human affairs. Such beings, he maintained, needed only to
be educated (3) to become not only happy themselves and happy
administrators of their private households, but to be capable of
rendering other human beings as states or individuals happy also.

 (1) Or, "not excellence of body in respect of beauty, but of the soul
    as regards virtue; and this good natural disposition might be
    detected by the readiness of its possessor to learn," etc. Cf.
    Plat. "Rep." 535 B.

 (2) Cf. above, I. i. 7.

 (3) Or, "A person of this type would, if educated, not only prove a
    fortune-favoured individual himself and," etc. Al. Kuhner, "Eos,
    qui ita instituti sunt, ut tales sint."

He had indeed a different way of dealing with different kinds of
people. (4) Those who thought they had good natural ability and despised
learning he instructed that the most highly-gifted nature stands most
in need of training and education; (5) and he would point out how in the
case of horses it is just the spirited and fiery thoroughbred which, if
properly broken in as a colt, will develop into a serviceable and superb
animal, but if left unbroken will turn out utterly intractable and good
for nothing. Or take the case of dogs: a puppy exhibiting that zest for
toil and eagerness to attack wild creatures which are the marks of high
breeding, (6) will, if well brought up, prove excellent for the chase or
for any other useful purpose; but neglect his education and he will turn
out a stupid, crazy brute, incapable of obeying the simplest command. It
is just the same with human beings; here also the youth of best natural
endowments--that is to say, possessing the most robust qualities of
spirit and a fixed determination to carry out whatever he has laid his
hand to--will, if trained and taught what it is right to do, prove a
superlatively good and useful man. He achieves, in fact, what is best
upon the grandest scale. But leave him in boorish ignorance untrained,
and he will prove not only very bad but very mischievous, (7) and for
this reason, that lacking the knowledge to discern what is right to do,
he will frequently lay his hand to villainous practices; whilst the very
magnificence and vehemence of his character render it impossible either
to rein him in or to turn him aside from his evil courses. Hence in his
case also his achievements are on the grandest scale but of the worst.
(8)

 (4) Or, "His method of attack was not indeed uniformly the same. It
    varied with the individual."

 (5) Or, "If any one was disposed to look down upon learning and study
    in reliance upon his own natural ability, he tried to lesson him
    that it is just the highly-gifted nature which stands," etc. See
    Newman, op. cit. i. 397.

 (6) Cf. Aristot. "H. A." ix. 1; and "Hunting," iii. 11.

 (7) Or, "and the same man may easily become a master villain of the
    most dangerous sort."

 (8) Kuhner ad loc. after Fr. Hermann cf. Plato. "Crito," 44 E; "Hipp.
    min." 375 E; "Rep." vi. 491 E; "Gorg." 526 A; "Polit." 303 A.

Or to take the type of person so eaten up with the pride of riches that
he conceives himself dispensed from any further need of education--since
it is "money makes the man," and his wealth will amply suffice him to
carry out his desires and to win honours from admiring humanity. (9)
Socrates would bring such people to their senses by pointing out the
folly of supposing that without instruction it was possible to draw the
line of demarcation (10) between what is gainful and what is hurtful
in conduct; and the further folly of supposing that, apart from such
discrimination, a man could help himself by means of wealth alone to
whatever he liked or find the path of expediency plain before him; and
was it not the veriest simplicity to suppose that, without the power of
labouring profitably, a man can either be doing well or be in any sort
of way sufficiently equipped for the battle of life? and again, the
veriest simplicity to suppose that by mere wealth without true knowledge
it was possible either to purchase a reputation for some excellence, or
without such reputation to gain distinction and celebrity?

 (9) Or, "and to be honoured by mankind."

 (10) Or, "that without learning the distinction it was possible to
    distinguish between," etc.


II

Or to come to a third kind--the class of people who are persuaded that
they have received the best education, and are proud of their wisdom:
his manner of dealing with these I will now describe.

Euthydemus (1) "the beautiful" had (Socrates was given to understand)
collected a large library, consisting of the most celebrated poets and
philosophers, (2) by help of which he already believed himself to be
more than a match for his fellows in wisdom, and indeed might presently
expect to out-top them all in capacity of speech and action. (3) At
first, as Socrates noted, the young man by reason of his youth had not
as yet set foot in the agora, (4) but if he had anything to transact,
his habit was to seat himself in a saddler's shop hard by. Accordingly
to this same saddler's shop Socrates betook himself with some of those
who were with him. And first the question was started by some one: "Was
it through consorting with the wise, (5) or by his own unaided talent,
that Themistocles came so to surpass his fellow-citizens that when the
services of a capable man were needed the eyes of the whole community
instinctively turned to him?" Socrates, with a view to stirring (6)
Euthydemus, answered: There was certainly an ingenuous simplicity in the
belief that superiority in arts of comparatively little worth could only
be attained by aid of qualified teachers, but that the leadership of the
state, the most important concern of all, was destined to drop into the
lap of anybody, no matter whom, like an accidental windfall. (7)

 (1) Euthydemus, the son of Diocles perhaps. See Plat. "Symp." 222 B,
    and Jowet ad loc.; Cobet, "Prosop. Xen." s.n.; K. Joel, op. cit.
    p. 372 foll. For {ton kalon} cf. "Phaedr." 278 E, "Isocrates the
    fair." For the whole chapter cf. Plat. "Alc." i.; "Lys." 210 E.
    See above, "Mem." I. ii. 29; Grote, "Plato," i. ch. x. passim.

 (2) Lit. "sophists." See Grote, "H. G." viii. p. 480, note. For
    private libraries see Becker, "Char." p. 272 foll. (Eng. tr.)

 (3) See "Hipparch," i. 24; "Cyrop." V. v. 46.

 (4) See above, III. vi. 1; Schneid. cf. Isocr. "Areop." 149 C.

 (5) Cf. Soph. fr. 12, {sophoi turannoi ton sophon xunousia}.

 (6) L. and S. cf. Plat. "Lys." 223 A; "Rep." 329 B: "Wishing to draw
    him out."

 (7) Cf. Plat. "Alc." i. 118 C: "And Pericles is said not to have got
    his wisdom by the light of nature, but to have associated with
    several of the philosophers" (Jowett).

On a subsequent occasion, Euthydemus being present, though, as was plain
to see, somewhat disposed to withdraw from the friendly concourse, (8)
as if he would choose anything rather than appear to admire Socrates on
the score of wisdom, the latter made the following remarks.

 (8) {sunedrias}, "the council."

Soc. It is clear from his customary pursuits, is it not, sirs, that when
our friend Euthydemus here is of full age, and the state propounds some
question for solution, he will not abstain from offering the benefit
of his advice? One can imagine the pretty exordium to his parliamentary
speeches which, in his anxiety not to be thought to have learnt anything
from anybody, he has ready for the occasion. (9) Clearly at the outset
he will deliver himself thus: "Men of Athens, I have never at any time
learnt anything from anybody; nor, if I have ever heard of any one as
being an able statesman, well versed in speech and capable of action,
have I sought to come across him individually. I have not so much as
been at pains to provide myself with a teacher from amongst those who
have knowledge; (10) on the contrary, I have persistently avoided, I
will not say learning from others, but the very faintest suspicion of
so doing. However, anything that occurs to me by the light of nature I
shall be glad to place at your disposal."... How appropriate (11) would
such a preface sound on the lips of any one seeking, say, the office of
state physician, (12) would it not? How advantageously he might begin
an address on this wise: "Men of Athens, I have never learnt the art of
healing by help of anybody, nor have I sought to provide myself with any
teacher among medical men. Indeed, to put it briefly, I have been ever
on my guard not only against learning anything from the profession, but
against the very notion of having studied medicine at all. If, however,
you will be so good as to confer on me this post, I promise I will do
my best to acquire skill by experimenting on your persons." Every one
present laughed at the exordium (and there the matter dropped).

 (9) Or, "the pretty exordium... now in course of composition. He
    must at all hazards avoid the suspicion of having picked up any
    crumb of learning from anybody; how can he help therefore
    beginning his speech thus?"

 (10) Or, "scientific experts."

 (11) Al. "Just as if one seeking the office of state physician were to
    begin with a like exordium." {armoseie} = "it would be consistent
    (with what has gone before)."

 (12) Schneider cf. Plat. "Laws," iv. 720 A; "Gorg." 456 A; and for
    "the parish doctor," "Polit." 259 A; Arist. "Acharn." 1030.

Presently, when it became apparent that Euthydemus had got so far that
he was disposed to pay attention to what was said, though he was still
at pains not to utter a sound himself, as if he hoped by silence to
attach to himself some reputation for sagacity, Socrates, wishing to
cure him of that defect, proceeded.

Soc. Is it not surprising that people anxious to learn to play the
harp or the flute, or to ride, or to become proficient in any like
accomplishment, are not content to work unremittingly in private by
themselves at whatever it is in which they desire to excel, but they
must sit at the feet of the best-esteemed teachers, doing all things
and enduring all things for the sake of following the judgment of those
teachers in everything, as though they themselves could not otherwise
become famous; whereas, among those who aspire to become eminent
politically as orators and statesmen, (13) there are some who cannot
see why they should not be able to do all that politics demand, at a
moment's notice, by inspiration as it were, without any preliminary
pains or preparations whatever? And yet it would appear that the latter
concerns must be more difficult of achievement than the former, in
proportion as there are more competitors in the field but fewer who
reach the goal of their ambition, which is as much as to say that a more
sustained effort of attention is needed on the part of those who embark
upon the sea of politics than is elsewhere called for.

 (13) Or, more lit. "powerful in speech and action within the sphere of
    politics."

Such were the topics on which Socrates was wont in the early days of
their association to dilate in the hearing of Euthydemus; but when the
philosopher perceived that the youth not only could tolerate the turns
of the discussion more readily but was now become a somewhat eager
listener, he went to the saddler's shop alone, (14) and when Euthydemus
was seated by his side the following conversation took place.

 (14) The question arises: how far is the conversation historical or
    imaginary?

Soc. Pray tell me, Euthydemus, is it really true what people tell me,
that you have made a large collection of the writings of "the wise," as
they are called? (15)

 (15) Or, "have collected several works of our classical authors and
    philosophers."

Euthydemus answered: Quite true, Socrates, and I mean to go on
collecting until I possess all the books I can possibly lay hold of.

Soc. By Hera! I admire you for wishing to possess treasures of wisdom
rather than of gold and silver, which shows that you do not believe gold
and silver to be the means of making men better, but that the thoughts
(16) of the wise alone enrich with virtue their possessions.

 (16) Lit. "gnomes," maxims, sententiae. Cf. Aristot. "Rhet." ii. 21.

And Euthydemus was glad when he heard that saying, for, thought he
to himself, "In the eyes of Socrates I am on the high road to the
acquisition of wisdom." But the latter, perceiving him to be pleased
with the praise, continued.

Soc. And what is it in which you desire to excel, Euthydemus, that you
collect books?

And when Euthydemus was silent, considering what answer he should
make, Socrates added: Possibly you want to be a great doctor? Why,
the prescriptions (17) of the Pharmacopoeia would form a pretty large
library by themselves.

 (17) {suggrammata}, "medical treatises." See Aristot. "Eth." x. 9, 21.

No, indeed, not I! (answered Euthydemus).

Soc. Then do you wish to be an architect? That too implies a man of
well-stored wit and judgment. (18)

 (18) Or, "To be that implies a considerable store of well-packed
    wisdom."

I have no such ambition (he replied).

Soc. Well, do you wish to be a mathematician, like Theodorus? (19)

 (19) Of Cyrene (cf. Plat. "Theaet.") taught Plato. Diog. Laert. ii. 8,
    19.

Euth. No, nor yet a mathematician.

Soc. Then do you wish to be an astronomer? (20) or (as the youth
signified dissent) possibly a rhapsodist? (21) (he asked), for I am told
you have the entire works of Homer in your possession. (22)

 (20) Cf. below, IV. vii. 4.

 (21) See "Symp." iii. 6; Plat. "Ion."

 (22) See Jowett, "Plato," i. 229; Grote, "Plato," i. 455.

Nay, God forbid! not I! (ejaculated the youth). Rhapsodists have a very
exact acquaintance with epic poetry, I know, of course; but they are
empty-pated creatures enough themselves. (23)

 (23) Or, "are simply perfect in the art of reciting epic poetry, but
    are apt to be the veriest simpletons themselves."

At last Socrates said: Can it be, Euthydemus, that you are an aspirant
to that excellence through which men become statesmen and administrators
fit to rule and apt to benefit (24) the rest of the world and
themselves?

 (24)  Or, "statesmen, and economists, and rules, and benefactors of
    the rest of the world and themselves."

Yes (replied he), that is the excellence I desire--beyond measure.

Upon my word (said Socrates), then you have indeed selected as the
object of your ambition the noblest of virtues and the greatest of the
arts, for this is the property of kings, and is entitled "royal"; but
(he continued) have you considered whether it is possible to excel in
these matters without being just and upright? (25)

 (25) Just, {dikaios} = upright, righteous. Justice, {dikaiosune} =
    social uprightness = righteousness, N.T. To quote a friend: "The
    Greek {dikaios} combines the active dealing out of justice with
    the self-reflective idea of preserving justice in our conduct,
    which is what we mean by 'upright.'"

Euth. Certainly I have, and I say that without justice and uprightness
it is impossible to be a good citizen.

No doubt (replied Socrates) you have accomplished that initial step?

Euth. Well, Socrates, I think I could hold my own against all comers as
an upright man.

And have upright men (continued Socrates) their distinctive and
appropriate works like those of carpenters or shoe-makers?

Euth. To be sure they have.

Soc. And just as the carpenter is able to exhibit his works and
products, the righteous man should be able to expound and set forth his,
should he not?

I see (replied Euthydemus) you are afraid I cannot expound the works
of righteousness! Why, bless me! of course I can, and the works of
unrighteousness into the bargain, since there are not a few of that sort
within reach of eye and ear every day.

Shall we then (proceeded Socrates) write the letter R on this side, (26)
and on that side the letter W; and then anything that appears to us
to be the product of righteousness we will place to the R account, and
anything which appears to be the product of wrong-doing and iniquity to
the account of W?

 (26) The letter R (to stand for Right, Righteous, Upright, Just). The
    letter W (to stand for Wrong, Unrighteous, Unjust).

By all means do so (he answered), if you think that it assists matters.

Accordingly Socrates drew the letters, as he had suggested, and
continued.

Soc. Lying exists among men, does it not?

Euth. Certainly.

To which side of the account then shall we place it? (he asked).

Euth. Clearly on the side of wrong and injustice.

Soc. Deceit too is not uncommon?

Euth. By no means.

Soc. To which side shall we place deceit?

Euth. Deceit clearly on the side of wrong.

Soc. Well, and chicanery (27) or mischief of any sort?

 (27) Reading {to kakourgein} (= furari, Sturz); al. {kleptein}, Stob.

Euth. That too.

Soc. And the enslavement of free-born men? (28)

 (28) Or, "the kidnapping of men into slavery." {to andrapodizesthai} =
    the reduction of a free-born man to a state of slavery. Slavery
    itself ({douleia}) being regarded as the normal condition of a
    certain portion of the human race and not in itself immoral.

Euth. That too.

Soc. And we cannot allow any of these to lie on the R side of the
account, to the side of right and justice, can we, Euthydemus?

It would be monstrous (he replied).

Soc. Very good. But supposing a man to be elected general, and he
succeeds in enslaving an unjust, wicked, and hostile state, are we to
say that he is doing wrong?

Euth. By no means.

Soc. Shall we not admit that he is doing what is right?

Euth. Certainly.

Soc. Again, suppose he deceives the foe while at war with them?

Euth. That would be all fair and right also.

Soc. Or steals and pillages their property? would he not be doing what
is right?

Euth. Certainly; when you began I thought you were limiting the question
to the case of friends.

Soc. So then everything which we set down on the side of Wrong will now
have to be placed to the credit of Right?

Euth. Apparently.

Soc. Very well then, let us so place them; and please, let us make a
new definition--that while it is right to do such things to a foe, it is
wrong to do them to a friend, but in dealing with the latter it behoves
us to be as straightforward as possible. (29)

 (29) Or, "an absolutely straightforward course is necessary."

I quite assent (replied Euthydemus).

So far so good (remarked Socrates); but if a general, seeing his troops
demoralised, were to invent a tale to the effect that reinforcements
were coming, and by means of this false statement should revive the
courage of his men, to which of the two accounts shall we place that act
of fraud? (30)

 (30) Cf. "Hell." IV. iii. 10; "Cyrop." I. vi. 31.

On the side of right, to my notion (he replied).

Soc. Or again, if a man chanced to have a son ill and in need of
medicine, which the child refused to take, and supposing the father by
an act of deceit to administer it under the guise of something nice to
eat, and by service of that lie to restore the boy to health, to which
account shall we set down this fraud?

Euth. In my judgment it too should be placed to the same account.

Soc. Well, supposing you have a friend in deplorably low spirits, and
you are afraid he will make away with himself--accordingly you rob him
of his knife or other such instrument: to which side ought we to set the
theft?

Euth. That too must surely be placed to the score of right behaviour.

Soc. I understand you to say that a straightforward course is not in
every case to be pursued even in dealing with friends?

Heaven forbid! (the youth exclaimed). If you will allow me, I rescind my
former statement. (31)

 (31) See above, I. ii. 44 ({anatithemai}).

Soc. Allow you! Of course you may--anything rather than make a false
entry on our lists.... But there is just another point we ought not to
leave uninvestigated. Let us take the case of deceiving a friend to
his detriment: which is the more wrongful--to do so voluntarily or
unintentionally?

Euth. Really, Socrates, I have ceased to believe in my own answers, for
all my former admissions and conceptions seem to me other than I
first supposed them. (32) Still, if I may hazard one more opinion, the
intentional deceiver, I should say, is worse than the involuntary.

 (32) Or, "all my original positions seem to me now other than I first
    conceived them"; or, "everything I first asserted seems now to be
    twisted topsy-turvy."

Soc. And is it your opinion that there is a lore and science of Right
and Justice just as there is of letters and grammar? (33)

 (33) {mathesis kai episteme tou dikaiou}--a doctrine and a knowledge
    of the Just.

Euth. That is my opinion.

Soc. And which should you say was more a man of letters (34)--he who
intentionally misspells or misreads, or he who does so unconsciously?

 (34) Or, "more grammatical"; "the better grammarian."

Euth. He who does so intentionally, I should say, because he can spell
or read correctly whenever he chooses.

Soc. Then the voluntary misspeller may be a lettered person, but the
involuntary offender is an illiterate? (35)

 (35) Or, "In fact, he who sins against the lore of grammer
    intentionally may be a good grammarian and a man of letters, but
    he who does so involuntarily is illiterate and a bad grammarian?"

Euth. True, he must be. I do not see how to escape from that conclusion.

Soc. And which of the two knows what is right--he who intentionally lies
and deceives, or he who lies and deceives unconsciously? (36)

 (36) Or, Soc. And does he who lies and deceives with intent know what
    is right rather than he who does either or both unconsciously?

    Euth. Clearly he does.

Euth. The intentional and conscious liar clearly.

Soc. Well then, your statement is this: on the one hand, the man who
has the knowledge of letters is more lettered than he who has no such
knowledge? (37)

 (37)  Or, Soc. It is a fair inference, is it not, that he who has the
    {episteme} of grammar is more grammatical than he who has no such
    {episteme}?

    Euth. Yes.

    Soc. And he who has the {episteme} of things rightful is more
    righteous than he who lacks the {episteme}? See Plat. "Hipp.
    min."; Arist. "Eth. Eud." VI. v. 7.

Euth. Yes.

Soc. And, on the other, he who has the knowledge of what is right is
more righteous than he who lacks that knowledge?

Euth. I suppose it is, but for the life of me I cannot make head or tail
of my own admission. (38)

 (38) Lit. "Apparently; but I appear to myself to be saying this also,
    heaven knows how." See Jowett, "Plato," ii. p. 416 (ed. 2).

Soc. Well (look at it like this). Suppose a man to be anxious to speak
the truth, but he is never able to hold the same language about a thing
for two minutes together. First he says: "The road is towards the east,"
and then he says, "No, it's towards the west"; or, running up a column
of figures, now he makes the product this, and again he makes it that,
now more, now less--what do you think of such a man?

Euth. Heaven help us! clearly he does not know what he thought he knew.

Soc. And you know the appellation given to certain people--"slavish,"
(39) or, "little better than a slave?"

 (39) {andropododeis}, which has the connotation of mental dulness, and
    a low order of intellect, cf. "boorish," "rustic," "loutish,"
    ("pariah," conceivably). "Slavish," "servile," with us connote
    moral rather than intellectual deficiency, I suppose. Hence it is
    impossible to preserve the humour of the Socratic argument. See
    Newman, op. cit. i. 107.

Euth. I do.

Soc. Is it a term suggestive of the wisdom or the ignorance of those to
whom it is applied?

Euth. Clearly of their ignorance.

Soc. Ignorance, for instance, of smithying?

Euth. No, certainly not.

Soc. Then possibly ignorance of carpentering?

Euth. No, nor yet ignorance of carpentering.

Soc. Well, ignorance of shoemaking?

Euth. No, nor ignorance of any of these: rather the reverse, for the
majority of those who do know just these matters are "little better than
slaves."

Soc. You mean it is a title particularly to those who are ignorant of
the beautiful, the good, the just? (40)

 (40) Cf. Goethe's "Im Ganzen Guten Schonen resolut zu leben."

It is, in my opinion (he replied).

Soc. Then we must in every way strain every nerve to avoid the
imputation of being slaves?

Euth. Nay, Socrates, by all that is holy, I did flatter myself that
at any rate I was a student of philosophy, and on the right road to
be taught everything essential to one who would fain make beauty and
goodness his pursuit. (41) So that now you may well imagine my despair
when, for all my pains expended, I cannot even answer the questions put
to me about what most of all a man should know; and there is no path of
progress open to me, no avenue of improvement left.

 (41) {tes kalokagathias}, the virtue of the {kalos te kagathos}--
    nobility of soul. Cf. above, I. vi. 14.

Thereupon Socrates: Tell me, Euthydemus, have you ever been to Delphi?

Yes, certainly; twice (said he).

Soc. And did you notice an inscription somewhere on the temple:
{GNOMI    SEAUTON}--KNOW THYSELF?

Euth. I did.

Soc. Did you, possibly, pay no regard to the inscription? or did you
give it heed and try to discover who and what you were?

I can safely say I did not (he answered). That much I made quite sure
I knew, at any rate; since if I did not know even myself, what in the
world did I know?

Soc. Can a man be said, do you think, to know himself who knows his own
name and nothing more? or must he not rather set to work precisely like
the would-be purchaser of a horse, who certainly does not think that he
has got the knowledge he requires until he has discovered whether the
beast is tractable or stubborn, strong or weak, quick or slow, and
how it stands with the other points, serviceable or the reverse, in
reference to the use and purpose of a horse? So, I say, must a man
in like manner interrogate his own nature in reference to a man's
requirements, and learn to know his own capacities, must he not?

Euth. Yes, so it strikes me: he who knows not his own ability knows not
himself.

Soc. And this too is plain, is it not: that through self-knowledge men
meet with countless blessings, and through ignorance of themselves
with many evils? Because, the man who knows himself knows what is
advantageous to himself; he discerns the limits of his powers, and by
doing what he knows, he provides himself with what he needs and so does
well; or, conversely, by holding aloof from what he knows not, he avoids
mistakes and thereby mishaps. And having now a test to gauge other human
beings he uses their need as a stepping-stone to provide himself with
good and to avoid evil. Whereas he who does not know himself, but is
mistaken as to his own capacity, is in like predicament to the rest of
mankind and all human matters else; he neither knows what he wants,
nor what he is doing, nor the people whom he deals with; and being all
abroad in these respects, he misses what is good and becomes involved in
what is ill.

Again, he that knows what he is doing through the success of his
performance attains to fame and honour; his peers and co-mates are glad
to make use of him, whilst his less successful neighbours, failing
in their affairs, are anxious to secure his advice, his guidance, his
protection; (42) they place their hopes of happiness in him, and for all
these causes (43) single him out as the chief object of their affection.
He, on the contrary, who knows not what he does, who chooses amiss and
fails in what he puts his hands to, not only incurs loss and suffers
chastisement through his blunders, but step by step loses reputation
and becomes a laughing-stock, and in the end is doomed to a life of
dishonour and contempt.

 (42) Cf. Dante, "Tu duca, tu maestro, tu signore."

 (43) Reading, {dia panta tauta}, or if {dia tauta}, translate "and
    therefore."

What is true of individuals is true also of communities. (44) That state
which in ignorance of its power goes to war with a stronger than itself
ends by being uprooted or else reduced to slavery.

 (44) Or, more lit. "A law which applies, you will observe, to bodies
    politic."

Thereupon Euthydemus: Be assured I fully concur in your opinion; the
precept KNOW THYSELF cannot be too highly valued; but what is the
application? What the starting-point of self-examination? I look to you
for an explanation, if you would kindly give one. (45)

 (45) Or, "at what point to commence the process of self-inspection?--
    there is the mystery. I look to you, if you are willing, to
    interpret it."

Well (replied Socrates), I presume you know quite well the distinction
between good and bad things: your knowledge may be relied upon so far?

Why, yes, to be sure (replied the youth); for without that much
discernment I should indeed be worse than any slave. (46)

 (46) Lit. "if I did not know even that."

Come then (said he), do you give me an explanation of the things so
termed.

That is fortunately not hard (replied the youth). First of all, health
in itself I hold to be a good, and disease in itself an evil; and in the
next place the sources of either of those aforenamed, meats and drinks,
and habits of life, (47) I regard as good or evil according as they
contribute either to health or to disease.

 (47) Or, "pursuits and occupations"; "manners and customs."

Soc. Then health and disease themselves when they prove to be sources of
any good are good, but when of any evil, evil?

And when (asked he), can health be a source of evil, or disease a source
of good?

Why, bless me! often enough (replied Socrates). In the event, for
instance, of some ill-starred expedition or of some disastrous voyage
or other incident of the sort, of which veritably there are enough to
spare--when those who owing to their health and strength take a part
in the affair are lost; whilst those who were left behind--as hors de
combat, on account of ill-health of other feebleness--are saved.

Euth. Yes, you are right; but you will admit that there are advantages
to be got from strength and lost through weakness.

Soc. Even so; but ought we to regard those things which at one moment
benefit and at another moment injure us in any strict sense good rather
than evil?

Euth. No, certainly not, according to that line of argument. But wisdom,
(48) Socrates, you must on your side admit, is irrefragably a good;
since there is nothing which or in which a wise man would not do better
than a fool.

 (48) See above, III. ix. 5. Here {sophia} is not = {sophrosune}.

Soc. What say you? Have you never heard of Daedalus, (49) how he was
seized by Minos on account of his wisdom, and forced to be his slave,
and robbed of fatherland and freedom at one swoop? and how, while
endeavouring to make his escape with his son, he caused the boy's
death without effecting his own salvation, but was carried off among
barbarians and again enslaved?

 (49) See Ovid. "Met." viii. 159 foll., 261 foll.; Hygin. "Fab." 39,
    40; Diod. Sic. iv. 79; Paus. vii. 4. 6.

Yes, I know the old story (he answered). (50)

 (50) Or, "Ah yes, of course; the tale is current."

Soc. Or have you not heard of the "woes of Palamedes," (51) that
commonest theme of song, how for his wisdom's sake Odysseus envied him
and slew him?

 (51) See Virg. "Aen." ii. 90; Hygin. 105; Philostr. "Her." x.

Euth. That tale also is current.

Soc. And how many others, pray, do you suppose have been seized on
account of their wisdom, and despatched to the great king and at his
court enslaved? (52)

 (52) Cf. Herod. iii. 129.

Well, prosperity, well-being (53) (he exclaimed), must surely be a
blessing, and that the most indisputable, Socrates?

 (53) {to eudaimonein}, "happiness." Cf. Herod. i. 86.

It might be so (replied the philosopher) if it chanced not to be in
itself a compound of other questionable blessings.

Euth. And which among the components of happiness and well-being can
possibly be questionable?

None (he retorted), unless of course we are to include among these
components beauty, or strength, or wealth, or reputation, or anything
else of that kind?

Euth. By heaven! of course we are to include these, for what would
happiness be without these?

Soc. By heaven! yes; only then we shall be including the commonest
sources of mischief which befall mankind. How many are ruined by their
fair faces at the hand of admirers driven to distraction (54) by the
sight of beauty in its bloom! how many, tempted by their strength to
essay deeds beyond their power, are involved in no small evils! how
many, rendered effeminate by reason of their wealth, have been plotted
against and destroyed! (55) how many through fame and political power
have suffered a world of woe!

 (54) Cf. Plat. "Rep." vii. 517 D; "Phaedr." 249 D.

 (55) e.g. Alcibiades.

Well (the youth replied) if I am not even right in praising happiness,
I must confess I know not for what one ought to supplicate the gods in
prayer. (56)

 (56) See above for Socrates' own form of supplication.

Nay, these are matters (proceeded Socrates) which perhaps, through
excessive confidence in your knowledge of them, you have failed to
examine into; but since the state, which you are preparing yourself to
direct, is democratically constituted, (57) of course you know what a
democracy is.

 (57) Or, "popularly governed."

Euth. I presume I do, decidedly.

Soc. Well, now, is it possible to know what a popular state is without
knowing who the people are?

Euth. Certainly not.

Soc. And whom do you consider to be the people?

Euth. The poor citizens, I should say.

Soc. Then you know who the poor are, of course?

Euth. Of course I do.

Soc. I presume you also know who the rich are?

Euth. As certainly as I know who are the poor.

Soc. Whom do you understand by poor and rich?

Euth. By poor I mean those who have not enough to pay for their
necessaries, (58) and by rich those who have more means than sufficient
for all their needs.

 (58) Al. "who cannot contribute their necessary quota to the taxes
    (according to the census)."

Soc. Have you noticed that some who possess a mere pittance not only
find this sufficient, but actually succeed in getting a surplus out of
it; while others do not find a large fortune large enough?

I have, most certainly; and I thank you for the reminder (replied
Euthydemus). One has heard of crowned heads and despotic rulers being
driven by want to commit misdeeds like the veriest paupers.

Then, if that is how matters stand (continued Socrates), we must class
these same crowned heads with the commonalty; and some possessors of
scant fortunes, provided they are good economists, with the wealthy?

Then Euthydemus: It is the poverty of my own wit which forces me to this
admission. I bethink me it is high time to keep silence altogether; a
little more, and I shall be proved to know absolutely nothing. And so he
went away crestfallen, in an agony of self-contempt, persuaded that he
was verily and indeed no better than a slave.

Amongst those who were reduced to a like condition by Socrates, many
refused to come near him again, whom he for his part looked upon as
dolts and dullards. (59) But Euthydemus had the wit to understand that,
in order to become worthy of account, his best plan was to associate
as much as possible with Socrates; and from that moment, save for some
necessity, he never left him--in some points even imitating him in his
habits and pursuits. Socrates, on his side, seeing that this was the
young man's disposition, disturbed him as little as possible, but in the
simplest and plainest manner initiated him into everything which he held
to be needful to know or important to practise.

 (59) Or, "as people of dull intelligence and sluggish temperament."
    Cf. Plat. "Gorg." 488 A.


III

It may be inferred that Socrates was in no hurry for those who were
with him to discover capacities for speech and action or as
inventive geniuses, (1) without at any rate a well-laid foundation of
self-control. (2) For those who possessed such abilities without these
same saving virtues would, he believed, only become worse men with
greater power for mischief. His first object was to instil into those
who were with him a wise spirit in their relation to the gods. (3) That
such was the tenor of his conversation in dealing with men may be
seen from the narratives of others who were present on some particular
occasion. (4) I confine myself to a particular discussion with
Euthydemus at which I was present.

 (1) Or, "as speakers" (see ch. vi. below), "and men of action" (see
    ch. v. below), "or as masters of invention" (see ch. vii. below).

 (2) Or, "but as prior to those excellences must be engrafted in them
    {sophrosune} (the virtues of temperance and sanity of soul)."

 (3) Lit. "His first object and endeavour was to make those who were
    with him {sophronas} (sound of soul) as regards the gods."

 (4) Reading after Herbst, Cobet, etc., {diegountai}, or if vulg.
    {diegounto}, translate, "from the current accounts penned during
    his lifetime by the other witnesses." For {alloi} see K. Joel, op.
    cit. pp. 15, 23; above, "Mem." I. iv. 1.

Socrates said: (5) Tell me, Euthydemus, has it ever struck you to
observe what tender pains the gods have taken to furnish man with all
his needs?

 (5) For the subject matter of this "teleological" chapter, see above,
    I. iv.; K. Joel, op. cit. Appendix, p. 547 foll. in ref. to
    Dummler's views.

Euth. No indeed, I cannot say that it has ever struck me.

Well (Socrates continued), you do not need to be reminded that, in the
first place, we need light, and with light the gods supply us.

Euth. Most true, and if we had not got it we should, as far as our own
eyes could help us, be like men born blind.

Soc. And then, again, seeing that we stand in need of rest and
relaxation, they bestow upon us "the blessed balm of silent night." (6)

 (6) {kalliston anapauterion}. The diction throughout is "poetical."

Yes (he answered), we are much beholden for that boon.

Soc. Then, forasmuch as the sun in his splendour makes manifest to us
the hours of the day and bathes all things in brightness, but anon night
in her darkness obliterates distinctions, have they not displayed aloft
the starry orbs, which inform us of the watches of the night, whereby we
can accomplish many of our needs? (7)

 (7) e.g. for temple orientation see Dr. Penrose quoted by Norman
    Lockyer, "Nature," August 31. 1893.

It is so (he answered).

Soc. And let us not forget that the moon herself not only makes clear to
us the quarters of the night, but of the month also?

Certainly (he answered).

Soc. And what of this: that whereas we need nutriment, this too the
heavenly powers yield us? Out of earth's bosom they cause good to spring
up (8) for our benefit; and for our benefit provide appropriate seasons
to furnish us in turn not only with the many and diverse objects of
need, but with the sources also of our joy and gladness? (9)

 (8) Cf. Plat. "Laws," 747 D.

 (9) Or, "pleasure."

Yes (he answered eagerly), these things bear token truly to a love for
man. (10)

 (10) Cf. Plat. "Laws," 713 D; "Symp." 189 D. "These things are signs
    of a beneficient regard for man."

Soc. Well, and what of another priceless gift, that of water, which
conspires with earth and the seasons to give both birth and increase to
all things useful to us; nay, which helps to nurture our very selves,
and commingling with all that feeds us, renders it more digestible, more
wholesome, and more pleasant to the taste; and mark you in proportion to
the abundance of our need the superabundance of its supply. What say you
concerning such a boon?

Euth. In this again I see a sign of providential care.

Soc. And then the fact that the same heavenly power has provided us with
fire (11)--our assistant against cold, our auxiliary in darkness, our
fellow-workman in every art and every instrument which for the sake of
its utility mortal man may invent or furnish himself withal. What of
this, since, to put it compendiously, there is nothing serviceable to
the life of man worth speaking of but owes its fabrication to fire? (12)

 (11) Lit. "and then the fact that they made provision for us of even
    fire"; the credit of this boon, according to Hesiod, being due to
    Prometheus.

 (12) Or, "no life-aiding appliance worthy of the name."

Euth. Yes, a transcendent instance of benevolent design. (13)

 (13) Or, "Yes, that may be called an extreme instance of the divine
    'philanthropy.'" Cf. Cic. "de N. D." ii. 62.

Soc. Again, consider the motions of the Sun, (14) how when he has
turned him about in winter (15) he again draws nigh to us, ripening some
fruits, and causing others whose time is past to dry up; how when he has
fulfilled his work he comes no closer, but turns away as if in fear to
scorch us to our hurt unduly; and again, when he has reached a point
where if he should prolong his retreat we should plainly be frozen to
death with cold, note how he turns him about and resumes his approach,
traversing that region of the heavens where he may shed his genial
influence best upon us.

 (14) A single MS. inserts a passage {to de kai era...
    'Anekphraston}.

 (15) i.e. as we say, "after the winter solstice."

Yes, upon my word (he answered), these occurrences bear the impress of
being so ordered for the sake of man.

Soc. And then, again, it being manifest that we could not endure either
scorching heat or freezing cold if they came suddenly upon us, note how
gradually the sun approaches, and how gradually recedes, so that we fail
to notice how we come at last to either extreme. (16)

 (16) Or, "note the gradual approach and gradual recession of the sun-
    god, so gradual that we reach either extreme in a manner
    imperceptibly, and before we are aware of its severity."

For my part (he replied), the question forces itself upon my mind,
whether the gods have any other occupation save only to minister to man;
and I am only hindered from saying so, because the rest of animals would
seem to share these benefits along with man.

Soc. Why, to be sure; and is it not plain that these animals themselves
are born and bred for the sake of man? At any rate, no living creature
save man derives so many of his enjoyments from sheep and goats, horses
and cattle and asses, and other animals. He is more dependent, I should
suppose, on these than even on plants and vegetables. At any rate,
equally with these latter they serve him as means of subsistence or
articles of commerce; indeed, a large portion of the human family do not
use the products of the soil as food at all, but live on the milk and
cheese and flesh of their flocks and herds, whilst all men everywhere
tame and domesticate the more useful kinds of animals, and turn them to
account as fellow-workers in war and for other purposes.

Yes, I cannot but agree with what you say (he answered), when I see that
animals so much stronger than man become so subservient to his hand that
he can use them as he lists.

Soc. And as we reflect on the infinite beauty and utility and the
variety of nature, what are we to say of the fact that man has been
endowed with sensibilities which correspond with this diversity, whereby
we take our fill of every blessing; (17) or, again, this implanted
faculty of reasoning, which enables us to draw inferences concerning the
things which we perceive, and by aid of memory to understand how
each set of things may be turned to our good, and to devise countless
contrivances with a view to enjoying the good and repelling the evil; or
lastly, when we consider the faculty bestowed upon us of interpretative
speech, by which we are enabled to instruct one another, and to
participate in all the blessings fore-named: to form societies, to
establish laws, and to enter upon a civilised existence (18)--what are
we to think?

 (17) Or, "Again, when we consider how many beautiful objects there are
    serviceable to man, and yet how unlike they are to one another,
    the fact that man has been endowed with senses adapted to each
    class of things, and so has access to a world of happiness."

 (18) Cf. Aristot. "Pol." III. ix. 5.

Euth. Yes, Socrates, decidedly it would appear that the gods do manifest
a great regard, nay, a tender care, towards mankind.

Soc. Well, and what do you make of the fact that where we are powerless
to take advantageous forethought for our future, at this stage they
themselves lend us their co-operation, imparting to the inquirer through
divination knowledge of events about to happen, and instructing him by
what means they may best be turned to good account?

Euth. Ay, and you, Socrates, they would seem to treat in a more friendly
manner still than the rest of men, if, without waiting even to be
inquired of by you, they show you by signs beforehand what you must, and
what you must not do. (19)

 (19) See above, I. iv. 14, for a parallel to the train of thought on
    the part of Aristodemus "the little," and of Euthydemus; and for
    Socrates' {daimonion}, see above; Grote, "Plato," i. 400.

Soc. Yes, and you will discover for yourself the truth of what I say, if,
without waiting to behold the outward and visible forms (20) of the gods
themselves, you will be content to behold their works; and with these
before you, to worship and honour the Divine authors of them. (21)
I would have you reflect that the very gods themselves suggest this
teaching. (22) Not one of these but gives us freely of his blessings;
yet they do not step from behind their veil in order to grant one
single boon. (23) And pre-eminently He who orders and holds together
the universe, (24) in which are all things beautiful and good; (25) who
fashions and refashions it to never-ending use unworn, keeping it free
from sickness or decay, (26) so that swifter than thought it ministers
to his will unerringly--this God is seen to perform the mightiest
operations, but in the actual administration of the same abides himself
invisible to mortal ken. Reflect further, this Sun above our heads, so
visible to all--as we suppose--will not suffer man to regard him too
narrowly, but should any essay to watch him with a shameless stare he
will snatch away their power of vision. And if the gods themselves are
thus unseen, so too shall you find their ministers to be hidden also;
from the height of heaven above the thunderbolt is plainly hurled, and
triumphs over all that it encounters, yet it is all-invisible, no eye
may detect its coming or its going at the moment of its swoop. The winds
also are themselves unseen, though their works are manifest, and through
their approach we are aware of them. And let us not forget, the soul
of man himself, which if aught else human shares in the divine--however
manifestly enthroned within our bosom, is as wholly as the rest hidden
from our gaze. These things you should lay to mind, and not despise
the invisible ones, but learn to recognise their power, as revealed in
outward things, and to know the divine influence. (27)

 (20) Cf. Cic. "de N. D." I. xii. 31; Lactantius, "de Ira," xi. 13.

 (21) See L. Dindorf ad loc. (ed. Ox. 1862), {theous}; G. Sauppe, vol.
    iii. "An. crit." p. xxix; R. Kuhner; C. Schenkl.

 (22) i.e. "that man must walk by faith." For {upodeiknunai} cf.
    "Econ." xii. 18.

 (23) Schneid. cf. Plat. "Crat." 396.

 (24) Or, "the co-ordinator and container of the universe."

 (25) Or, "in whom all beauty and goodness is."

 (26) Cf. "Cyrop." VIII. vii. 22; above, I. iv. 13.

 (27) {to daimonion}, the divinity.

Nay, Socrates (replied Euthydemus), there is no danger I shall turn a
deaf ear to the divine influence even a little; of that I am not afraid,
but I am out of heart to think that no soul of man may ever requite the
kindness of the gods with fitting gratitude.

Be not out of heart because of that (he said); you know what answer the
god at Delphi makes to each one who comes asking "how shall I return
thanks to heaven?"--"According to the law and custom of your city"; and
this, I presume, is law and custom everywhere that a man should please
the gods with offerings according to the ability which is in him. (28)
How then should a man honour the gods with more beautiful or holier
honour than by doing what they bid him? but he must in no wise slacken
or fall short of his ability, for when a man so does, it is manifest, I
presume, that at the moment he is not honouring the gods. You must then
honour the gods, not with shortcoming but according to your ability;
and having so done, be of good cheer and hope to receive the greatest
blessings. For where else should a man of sober sense look to receive
great blessings if not from those who are able to help him most, and how
else should he hope to obtain them save by seeking to please his helper,
and how may he hope to please his helper better than by yielding him the
amplest obedience?

 (28) Or, "and that law, I presume, is universal which says, Let a
    man," etc.; and for the maxim see above; "Anab." III. ii. 9.

By such words--and conduct corresponding to his words--did Socrates
mould and fashion the hearts of his companions, making them at once more
devout and more virtuous. (29)

 (29) Or, "sounder of soul and more temperate as well as more pious."


IV

But indeed (1) with respect to justice and uprightness he not only made
no secret of the opinion he held, but gave practical demonstration of
it, both in private by his law-abiding and helpful behaviour to all, (2)
and in public by obeying the magistrates in all that the laws enjoined,
whether in the life of the city or in military service, so that he was
a pattern of loyalty to the rest of the world, and on three several
occasions in particular: first, when as president (Epistates) of
the assembly he would not suffer the sovereign people to take an
unconstitutional vote, (3) but ventured, on the side of the laws, to
resist a current of popular feeling strong enough, I think, to have
daunted any other man. Again, when the Thirty tried to lay some
injunction on him contrary to the laws, he refused to obey, as for
instance when they forbade his conversing with the young; (4) or again,
when they ordered him and certain other citizens to arrest a man to
be put to death, (5) he stood out single-handed on the ground that the
injunctions laid upon him were contrary to the laws. And lastly, when
he appeared as defendant in the suit instituted by Meletus, (6)
notwithstanding that it was customary for litigants in the law courts
to humour the judges in the conduct of their arguments by flattery
and supplications contrary to the laws, (7) notwithstanding also that
defendants owed their acquittal by the court to the employment of such
methods, he refused to do a single thing however habitual in a court of
law which was not strictly legal; and though by only a slight deflection
from the strict path he might easily have been acquitted by his judges,
(8) he preferred to abide by the laws and die rather than transgress
them and live.

 (1) L. Dindorf suspects  (SS. 1-6, {'Alla men... pollakis}), ed.
    Lips. 1872. See also Praef. to Ox. ed. p. viii.

 (2) Or, "by his conduct to all, which was not merely innocent in the
    eye of law and custom but positively helpful."

 (3) See above, I. i. 18; "Hell." I. vii. 14, 15; Grote, "H. G." viii.
    272.

 (4) See above, I. ii. 35.

 (5) Leon of Salamis. See "Hell." II. iii. 39; Plat. "Apol." 32 C;
    Andoc. "de Myst." 46.

 (6) See above, I. i. 1; Plat. "Apol." 19 C.

 (7) Kuhner cf. Quintil. VI. i. 7: "Athenis affectus movere etiam per
    praeconem prohibatur orator"; "Apol." 4; Plat. "Apol." 38 D, E.

 (8) See Grote, "H. G." viii. p. 663 foll.

These views he frequently maintained in conversation, now with one and
now with another, and one particular discussion with Hippias of Elis (9)
on the topic of justice and uprightness has come to my knowledge. (10)

 (9) For this famous person see Cob. "Pros. Xen." s.n.; Plat. "Hipp.
    maj." 148; Quint. xii. 11, 21; Grote, "H. G." viii. 524.

 (10) Or, "I can personally vouch for."

Hippias had just arrived at Athens after a long absence, and chanced to
be present when Socrates was telling some listeners how astonishing
it was that if a man wanted to get another taught to be a shoemaker or
carpenter or coppersmith or horseman, he would have no doubt where to
send him for the purpose: "People say," (11) he added, "that if a man
wants to get his horse or his ox taught in the right way, (12) the world
is full of instructors; but if he would learn himself, or have his son
or his slave taught in the way of right, he cannot tell where to find
such instruction."

 (11) L. Dindorf, after Ruhnken and Valckenar, omits this sentence
    {phasi de tines... didaxonton}. See Kuhner ad loc. For the
    sentiment see Plat. "Apol." 20 A.

 (12) Cf. "Cyrop." II. ii. 26; VIII. iii. 38; also "Horsem." iii. 5;
    "Hunting," vii. 4.

Hippias, catching the words, exclaimed in a bantering tone: What! still
repeating the same old talk, (13) Socrates, which I used to hear from
you long ago?

 (13) This tale is repeated by Dio Chrys. "Or." III. i. 109. Cf. Plat.
    "Gorg." 490 E.

Yes (answered Socrates), and what is still more strange, Hippias, it is
not only the same old talk but about the same old subjects. Now you, I
daresay, through versatility of knowledge, (14) never say the same thing
twice over on the same subject?

 (14) Or, "such is the breadth of your learning," {polumathes}. Cf.
    Plat. "Hipp. maj."

To be sure (he answered), my endeavour is to say something new on all
occasions.

What (he asked) about things which you know, as for instance in a case
of spelling, if any one asks you, "How many letters in Socrates, and
what is their order?" (15) I suppose you try to run off one string of
letters to-day and to-morrow another? or to a question of arithmetic,
"Does twice five make ten?" your answer to-day will differ from that of
yesterday?

 (15) Cf. "Econ." viii. 14; Plat. "Alc." i. 113 A.

Hipp. No; on these topics, Socrates, I do as you do and repeat myself.
However, to revert to justice (and uprightness), (16) I flatter myself
I can at present furnish you with some remarks which neither you nor any
one else will be able to controvert.

 (16) Or, "on the topic of the just I have something to say at present
    which," etc.

By Hera! (17) (he exclaimed), what a blessing to have discovered! (18)
Now we shall have no more divisions of opinion on points of right and
wrong; judges will vote unanimously; citizens will cease wrangling;
there will be no more litigation, no more party faction, states will
reconcile their differences, and wars are ended. For my part I do not
know how I can tear myself away from you, until I have heard from your
own lips all about the grand discovery you have made.

 (17) See above, I. v. 5.

 (18) Or, "what a panacea are you the inventor of"; lit. "By Hera, you
    have indeed discovered a mighty blessing, if juries are to cease
    recording their verdicts 'aye' and 'no'; if citizens are to cease
    their wranglings on points of justice, their litigations, and
    their party strifes; if states are to cease differing on matters
    of right and wrong and appealing to the arbitrament of war."

You shall hear all in good time (Hippias answered), but not until you
make a plain statement of your own belief. What is justice? We have had
enough of your ridiculing all the rest of the world, questioning and
cross-examining first one and then the other, but never a bit will you
render an account to any one yourself or state a plain opinion upon a
single topic. (19)

 (19) See Plat. "Gorg." 465 A.

What, Hippias (Socrates retorted), have you not observed that I am in a
chronic condition of proclaiming what I regard as just and upright?

Hipp. And pray what is this theory (20) of yours on the subject? Let us
have it in words.

 (20) {o logos}.

Soc. If I fail to proclaim it in words, at any rate I do so in deed and
in fact. Or do you not think that a fact is worth more as evidence than
a word? (21)

 (21) Or, "is of greater evidential value," "ubi res adsunt, quid opus
    est verbis?"

Worth far more, I should say (Hippias answered), for many a man with
justice and right on his lips commits injustice and wrong, but no doer
of right ever was a misdoer or could possibly be.

Soc. I ask then, have you ever heard or seen or otherwise perceived me
bearing false witness or lodging malicious information, or stirring up
strife among friends or political dissension in the city, or committing
any other unjust and wrongful act?

No, I cannot say that I have (he answered).

Soc. And do you not regard it as right and just to abstain from wrong?
(22)

 (22) Or, "is not abstinence from wrongdoing synonymous with righteous
    behaviour?"

Hipp. Now you are caught, Socrates, plainly trying to escape from a
plain statement. When asked what you believe justice to be, you keep
telling us not what the just man does, but what he does not do.

Why, I thought for my part (answered Socrates) that the refusal to do
wrong and injustice was a sufficient warrent in itself of righteousness
and justice, but if you do not agree, see if this pleases you better: I
assert that what is "lawful" is "just and righteous."

Do you mean to assert (he asked) that lawful and just are synonymous
terms?

Soc. I do.

I ask (Hippias added), for I do not perceive what you mean by lawful,
nor what you mean by just. (23)

 (23) Lit. "what sort of lawful or what sort of just is spoken of."

Soc. You understand what is meant by laws of a city or state?

Yes (he answered).

Soc. What do you take them to be?

Hipp. The several enactments drawn up by the citizens or members of a
state in agreement as to what things should be done or left undone.

Then I presume (Socrates continued) that a member of a state who
regulates his life in accordance with these enactments will be
law-abiding, while the transgressor of the same will be law-less?

Certainly (he answered).

Soc. And I presume the law-loving citizen will do what is just and
right, while the lawless man will do what is unjust and wrong?

Hipp. Certainly.

Soc. And I presume that he who does what is just is just, and he who
does what is unjust is unjust?

Hipp. Of course.

Soc. It would appear, then, that the law-loving man is just, and the
lawless unjust?

Then Hippias: Well, but laws, Socrates, how should any one regard as a
serious matter either the laws themselves, or obedience to them,
which laws the very people who made them are perpetually rejecting and
altering?

Which is also true of war (Socrates replied); cities are perpetually
undertaking war and then making peace again.

Most true (he answered).

Soc. If so, what is the difference between depreciating obedience to law
because laws will be repealed, and depreciating good discipline in war
because peace will one day be made? But perhaps you object to enthusiasm
displayed in defence of one's home and fatherland in war?

No, indeed I do not! I heartily approve of it (he answered).

Soc. Then have you laid to heart the lesson taught by Lycurgus to the
Lacedaemonians, (24) and do you understand that if he succeeded
in giving Sparta a distinction above other states, it was only by
instilling into her, beyond all else, a spirit of obedience to the laws?
And among magistrates and rulers in the different states, you would
scarcely refuse the palm of superiority to those who best contribute
to make their fellow-citizens obedient to the laws? And you would
admit that any particular state in which obedience to the laws is the
paramount distinction of the citizens flourishes most in peace time, and
in time of war is irresistible? But, indeed, of all the blessings which
a state may enjoy, none stands higher than the blessing of unanimity.
"Concord among citizens"--that is the constant theme of exhortation
emphasised by the councils of elders (25) and by the choice spirits of
the community; (26) at all times and everywhere through the length and
breadth of all Hellas it is an established law that the citizens be
bound together by an oath of concord; (27) everywhere they do actually
swear this oath; not of course as implying that citizens shall all vote
for the same choruses, or give their plaudits to the same flute-players,
or choose the same poets, or limit themselves to the same pleasures, but
simply that they shall pay obedience to the laws, since in the end that
state will prove most powerful and most prosperous in which the
citizens abide by these; but without concord neither can a state be well
administered nor a household well organised.

 (24) Cf. "Pol. Lac." viii. See Newman, op. cit. i. 396.

 (25) Lit. "the Gerousiai." {S} or {X S} uses the Spartan phraseology.

 (26) Lit. "the best men." {S} or {X S} speaks as an "aristocrat."

 (27) Cf. "Hell." II. iv. 43; Lys. xxv. 21 foll.; Schneid. cf. Lycurg.
    "u Leocr." 189.

And if we turn to private life, what better protection can a man
have than obedience to the laws? This shall be his safeguard against
penalties, his guarantee of honours at the hands of the community; it
shall be a clue to thread his way through the mazes of the law courts
unbewildered, secure against defeat, assured of victory. (28) It is
to him, the law-loving citizen, that men will turn in confidence when
seeking a guardian of the most sacred deposits, be it of money or be it
their sons or daughters. He, in the eyes of the state collectively, is
trustworthy--he and no other; who alone may be depended on to render to
all alike their dues--to parents and kinsmen and servants, to friends
and fellow-citizens and foreigners. This is he whom the enemy will
soonest trust to arrange an armistice, or a truce, or a treaty of peace.
They would like to become the allies of this man, and to fight on
his side. This is he to whom the allies (29) of his country will most
confidently entrust the command of their forces, or of a garrison, or
their states themselves. This, again, is he who may be counted on to
recompense kindness with gratitude, and who, therefore, is more sure of
kindly treatment than another whose sense of gratitude is fuller. (30)
The most desirable among friends, the enemy of all others to be avoided,
clearly he is not the person whom a foreign state would choose to go
to war with; encompassed by a host of friends and exempt from foes, his
very character has a charm to compel friendship and alliance, and before
him hatred and hostility melt away.

 (28) Or, "ignorant of hostile, assured of favourable verdict."

 (29) Lit. "the Allies," e.g. of Sparta or of Athens, etc.

 (30) Lit. "From whom may the doer of a deed of kindness more
    confidently expect the recompense of gratitude than from your
    lover of the law? and whom would one select as the recipient of
    kindness rather than a man susceptible of gratitude?"

And now, Hippias, I have done my part; that is my proof and
demonstration that the "lawful" and "law-observant" are synonymous
with the "upright" and the "just"; do you, if you hold a contrary view,
instruct us. (31)

 (31) For the style of this enconium (of the {nomimos}) cf. "Ages." i.
    36; and for the "Socratic" reverence for law cf. Plat. "Crito."

Then Hippias: Nay, upon my soul, Socrates, I am not aware of holding any
contrary opinion to what you have uttered on the theme of justice. (32)

 (32) Lit. "the just and upright," {tou dikaiou}.

Soc. But now, are you aware, Hippias, of certain unwritten laws? (33)

 (33) See Soph. "Antig." "Oed. T." 865, and Prof. Jebb ad loc.; Dem.
    "de Cor." 317, 23; Aristot. "Rhet." I. xiii.

Yes (he answered), those held in every part of the world, and in the
same sense.

Can you then assert (asked Socrates) of these unwritten laws that men
made them?

Nay, how (he answered) should that be, for how could they all have come
together from the ends of the earth? and even if they had so done, men
are not all of one speech? (34)

 (34) Or, "there would be difficulty of understanding each other, and a
    babel of tongues."

Soc. Whom then do you believe to have been the makers of these laws.

Hipp. For my part, I think that the gods must have made these laws for
men, and I take it as proof that first and foremost it is a law and
custom everywhere to worship and reverence the gods.

Soc. And, I presume, to honour parents is also customary everywhere?

Yes, that too (he answered).

Soc. And, I presume, also the prohibition of intermarriage between
parents and children?

Hipp. No; at that point I stop, Socrates. That does not seem to me to be
a law of God.

Now, why? (he asked).

Because I perceive it is not infrequently transgressed (he answered).
(35)

 (35) Or, "as I perceive, it is not of universal application, some
    transgress it."

Soc. Well, but there are a good many other things which people
do contrary to law; only the penalty, I take it, affixed to the
transgression of the divine code is certain; there is no escape for the
offender after the manner in which a man may transgress the laws of man
with impunity, slipping through the fingers of justice by stealth, or
avoiding it by violence.

Hipp. And what is the inevitable penalty paid by those who, being
related as parents and children, intermingle in marriage?

Soc. The greatest of all penalties; for what worse calamity can human
beings suffer in the production of offspring than to misbeget? (36)

 (36) Or, "in the propagation of the species than to produce
    misbegotten children."

Hipp. But how or why should they breed them ill where nothing hinders
them, being of a good stock themselves and producing from stock as good?

Soc. Because, forsooth, in order to produce good children, it is not
simply necessary that the parents should be good and of a good stock,
but that both should be equally in the prime and vigour of their bodies.
(37) Do you suppose that the seed of those who are at their prime is
like theirs who either have not yet reached their prime, or whose prime
has passed?

 (37) Cf. Plat. "Laws," viii. 839 A; Herbst, etc., cf. Grotius, "de
    Jure," ii. 5, xii. 4.

Hipp. No, it is reasonable to expect that the seed will differ.

Soc. And for the better--which?

Hipp. Theirs clearly who are at their prime.

Soc. It would seem that the seed of those who are not yet in their prime
or have passed their prime is not good?

Hipp. It seems most improbable it should be.

Soc. Then the right way to produce children is not that way?

Hipp. No, that is not the right way.

Soc. Then children who are so produced are produced not as they ought to
be?

Hipp. So it appears to me.

What offspring then (he asked) will be ill produced, ill begotten, and
ill born, if not these?

I subscribe to that opinion also (replied Hippias).

Soc. Well, it is a custom universally respected, is it not, to return
good for good, and kindness with kindness?

Hipp. Yes, a custom, but one which again is apt to be transgressed.

Soc. Then he that so transgresses it pays penalty in finding himself
isolated; bereft of friends who are good, and driven to seek after those
who love him not. Or is it not so that he who does me kindness in
my intercourse with him is my good friend, but if I requite not this
kindness to my benefactor, I am hated by him for my ingratitude, and yet
I must needs pursue after him and cling to him because of the great gain
to me of his society?

Hipp. Yes, Socrates. In all these cases, I admit, there is an
implication of divine authority; (38) that a law should in itself be
loaded with the penalty of its transgression does suggest to my mind a
higher than human type of legislator.

 (38) Lit. "Yes, upon my word, Socrates, all these cases look very like
    (would seem to point to) the gods."

Soc. And in your opinion, Hippias, is the legislation of the gods just
and righteous, or the reverse of what is just and righteous?

Hipp. Not the reverse of what is just and righteous, Socrates, God
forbid! for scarcely could any other legislate aright, of not God
himself.

Soc. It would seem then, Hippias, the gods themselves are well pleased
that "the lawful" and "the just" should be synonymous? (39)

 (39) Or, "it is well pleasing also to the gods that what is lawful is
    just and what is just is lawful."

By such language and by such conduct, through example and precept alike,
he helped to make those who approached him more upright and more just.


V

And now I propose to show in what way he made those who were with him
more vigorous in action. (1) In the first place, as befitted one whose
creed was that a basis of self-command is indispensable to any noble
performance, he manifested himself to his companions as one who
had pre-eminently disciplined himself; (2) and in the next place by
conversation and discussion he encouraged them to a like self-restraint
beyond all others. (3) Thus it was that he continued ever mindful
himself, and was continually reminding all whom he encountered,
of matters conducive to virtue; as the following discussion with
Euthydemus, which has come to my knowledge, (4) will serve to
illustrate--the topic of the discussion being self-command.

 (1) Lit. "more practical," i.e. more energetic and effective.

 (2) "If any one might claim to be a prince of ascetics, it was
    Socrates; such was the ineffaceable impression left on the minds
    of his associates."

 (3) Or, "he stimulated in these same companions a spirit of self-
    restraint beyond all else."

 (4) Or, "which I can vouch for."

Tell me, Euthydemus (he began), do you believe freedom to be a noble and
magnificent acquisition, whether for a man or for a state?

I cannot conceive a nobler or more magnificent (he answered).

Soc. Then do you believe him to be a free man who is ruled by the
pleasures of the body, and thereby cannot perform what is best?

Certainly not (he answered).

Soc. No! for possibly to perform what is best appears to you to savour
of freedom? And, again, to have some one over you who will prevent you
doing the like seems a loss of freedom?

Most decidedly (he answered).

Soc. It would seem you are decidedly of opinion that the incontinent are
the reverse of free? (5)

 (5) Or, "incontinency is illiberal."

Euth. Upon my word, I much suspect so.

Soc. And does it appear to you that the incontinent man is merely
hindered from doing what is noblest, or that further he is impelled to
do what is most shameful?

Euth. I think he is as much driven to the one as he is hindered from the
other.

Soc. And what sort of lords and masters are those, think you, who at
once put a stop to what is best and enforce what is worst?

Euth. Goodness knows, they must be the very worst of masters.

Soc. And what sort of slavery do you take to be the worst?

I should say (he answered) slavery to the worst masters.

It would seem then (pursued Socrates) that the incontinent man is bound
over to the worst sort of slavery, would it not?

So it appears to be (the other answered).

Soc. And does it not appear to you that this same beldame incontinence
shuts out wisdom, which is the best of all things, (6) from mankind,
and plunges them into the opposite? Does it not appear to you that she
hinders men from attending to things which will be of use and benefit,
and from learning to understand them; that she does so by dragging them
away to things which are pleasant; and often though they are well aware
of the good and of the evil, she amazes and confounds (7) their wits and
makes them choose the worse in place of the better?

 (6) "Wisdom, the greatest good which men can possess."

 (7) Schneid. cf. Plat. "Protag." 355 A; and "Symp." iv. 23.

Yes, so it comes to pass (he answered).

Soc. And (8) soundness of soul, the spirit of temperate modesty? Who has
less claim to this than the incontinent man? The works of the temperate
spirit and the works of incontinency are, I take it, diametrically
opposed?

 (8) "And if this be so concerning wisdom, {sophia}, what of
    {sophrasune}, soundness of soul--sobriety?"

That too, I admit (he answered).

Soc. If this then be so concerning these virtues, (9) what with regard
to carefulness and devotion to all that ought to occupy us? Can anything
more seriously militate against these than this same incontinence?

 (9) Or add, "If this be so concerning not wisdom only, but concerning
    temperance and soundness of soul, what," etc.

Nothing that I can think of (he replied).

Soc. And can worse befall a man, think you? Can he be subjected to a
more baleful influence than that which induces him to choose what is
hurtful in place of what is helpful; which cajoles him to devote himself
to the evil and to neglect the good; which forces him, will he nill he,
to do what every man in his sober senses would shrink from and avoid?

I can imagine nothing worse (he replied).

Soc. Self-control, it is reasonable to suppose, will be the cause of
opposite effects upon mankind to those of its own opposite, the want of
self-control?

Euth. It is to be supposed so.

Soc. And this, which is the source of opposite effects to the very
worst, will be the very best of things?

Euth. That is the natural inference.

Soc. It looks, does it not, Euthydemus, as if self-control were the best
thing a man could have?

It does indeed, Socrates (he answered).

Soc. But now, Euthydemus, has it ever occurred to you to note one fact?

What fact? (he asked).

Soc. That, after all, incontinency is powerless to bring us to that
realm of sweetness which some look upon (10) as her peculiar province;
it is not incontinency but self-control alone which has the passport to
highest pleasures.

 (10) Or, "which we are apt to think of as."

In what way? (he asked). How so?

Why, this way (Socrates answered): since incontinency will not suffer us
to resist hunger and thirst, or to hold out against sexual appetite, or
want of sleep (which abstinences are the only channels to true pleasure
in eating and drinking, to the joys of love, to sweet repose and
blissful slumber won by those who will patiently abide and endure till
each particular happiness is at the flood) (11)--it comes to this: by
incontinency we are cut off from the full fruition of the more obvious
and constantly recurring pleasures. (12) To self-control, which alone
enables us to endure the pains aforesaid, alone belongs the power to
give us any pleasure worth remembering in these common cases.

 (11) Or, "at its season." Lit. "is as sweet as possible."

 (12) Or, "from tasting to any extent worth speaking of the most
    necessary and all-pervading sources of happiness."

You speak the words of truth (13) (he answered).

 (13) Lit. "What you say is absolutely and entirely true" (the "vraie
    verite" of the matter).

Soc. Furthermore, (14) if there be any joy in learning aught "beautiful
and good," or in patient application to such rules as may enable a man
to manage his body aright, or to administer his household well, or to
prove himself useful to his friends and to the state, or to dominate
his enemies--which things are the sources not only of advantage but of
deepest satisfaction (15)--to the continent and self-controlled it
is given to reap the fruits of them in their performance. It is the
incontinent who have neither part nor lot in any one of them. Since we
must be right in asserting that he is least concerned with such things
who has least ability to do them, being tied down to take an interest in
the pleasure which is nearest to hand.

 (14) Or, "But indeed, if there be joy in the pursuit of any noble
    study or of such accomplishments as shall enable," etc.

 (15) Or, "of the highest pleasures."

Euthydemus replied: Socrates, you would say, it seems to me, that a man
who is mastered by the pleasures of the body has no concern at all with
virtue.

And what is the distinction, Euthydemus (he asked), between a man devoid
of self-control and the dullest of brute beasts? A man who foregoes all
height of aim, who gives up searching for the best and strives only to
gratify his sense of pleasure, (16) is he better than the silliest of
cattle? (17)... But to the self-controlled alone is it given to discover
the hid treasures. These, by word and by deed, they will pick out and
make selection of them according to their kinds, choosing deliberately
the good and holding aloof from the evil. (18) Thus (he added) it is
that a man reaches the zenith, as it were, of goodness and happiness,
thus it is that he becomes most capable of reasoning and discussion.
(19) The very name discussion ({dialegesthai}) is got from people coming
together and deliberating in common by picking out and selecting things
({dialegein}) according to their kinds. (20) A man then is bound to
prepare himself as much as possible for this business, and to pursue it
beyond all else with earnest resolution; for this is the right road to
excellence, this will make a man fittest to lead his fellows and be a
master in debate. (21)

 (16) Or, "and seeks by hook and by crook to do what is pleasantest."

 (17) i.e. he becomes an animal "feeding a blind life within the
    brain."

 (18) Or, "selecting the ore and repudiating the dross." Kuhner cf.
    Plat. "Laws," v. 735 B.

 (19) Or, "draws nearer to happiness and perfection, and is most
    capable of truth-disclosing conversation." Cf. Plat. "Apol." 41:
    "What would not a man give, O judges, to be able to examine the
    leaders of the great Trojan expedition, or Odysseus, or Sisyphus,
    or numberless others, men and women too! What infinite delight
    would there be in conversing with them and asking them questions!"
    (Jowett).

 (20) For {dialegein kata gene} = {dialegesthai}, cf. Grote, "H. G."
    viii. 590.

 (21) Cf. Plat. "Rep." 534 D; "Phaedr." 252 E; "Crat." 390 C;
    "Statesm." 286 D foll.


VI

At this point I will endeavour to explain in what way Socrates fostered
this greater "dialectic" capacity among his intimates. (1) He held
firmly to the opinion that if a man knew what each reality was, he would
be able to explain this knowledge to others; but, failing the possession
of that knowledge, it did not surprise him that men should stumble
themselves and cause others to stumble also. (2) It was for this reason
that he never ceased inquiring with those who were with him into
the true nature of things that are. (3) It would be a long business
certainly to go through in detail all the definitions at which he
arrived; I will therefore content myself with such examples as will
serve to show his method of procedure. As a first instance I will
take the question of piety. The mode of investigation may be fairly
represented as follows.

 (1) Lit. "essayed to make those who were with him more potent in
    dialectic."

 (2) Or, "Socrates believed that any one who knew the nature of
    anything would be able to let others into his secret; but, failing
    that knowledge, he thought the best of men would be but blind
    leaders of the blind, stumbling themselves and causing others to
    stumble also."

 (3) Or add, "'What is this among things? and what is its definition?'
    --such was the ever-recurrent question for which he sought an
    answer."

Tell me (said he), Euthydemus, what sort of thing you take piety to be?

Something most fair and excellent, no doubt (the other answered). (4)

 (4) Or, "A supreme excellence, no doubt."

Soc. And can you tell me what sort of person the pious man is? (5)

 (5) Or, "can you give me a definition of the pious man?"; "tell me who
    and what the pious man is."

I should say (he answered) he is a man who honours the gods.

Soc. And is it allowable to honour the gods in any mode or fashion one
likes?

Euth. No; there are laws in accordance with which one must do that.

Soc. Then he who knows these laws will know how he must honour the gods?

I think so (he answered).

Soc. And he who knows how he must honour the gods conceives that
he ought not to do so except in the manner which accords with his
knowledge? (6) Is it not so?

 (6) i.e. "his practice must square with his knowledge and be the
    outward expression of his belief?"

Euth. That is so. (7)

 (7) "That is so; you rightly describe his frame of mind and
    persuasion."

Soc. And does any man honour the gods otherwise than he thinks he ought?
(8)

 (8) "As he should and must." See K. Joel, op. cit. p. 322 foll.

I think not (he answered).

Soc. It comes to this then: he who knows what the law requires in
reference to the gods will honour the gods in the lawful way? (9)

 (9) Or, "he who knows what is lawful with regard to Heaven pays honour
    to Heaven lawfully."

Euth. Certainly.

Soc. But now, he who honours lawfully honours as he ought? (10)

 (10) "As he should and must."

Euth. I see no alternative.

Soc. And he who honours as he ought is a pious man?

Euth. Certainly.

Soc. It would appear that he who knows what the law requires with
respect to the gods will correctly be defined as a pious man, and that
is our definition?

So it appears to me, at any rate (he replied). (11)

 (11) "I accept it at any rate as mine." N.B.--in reference to this
    definition of Piety, the question is never raised {poion ti esti
    nomos}; nor yet {poioi tines eisin oi theoi}; but clearly there is
    a growth in {ta nomima}. Cf. the conversation recorded in St. John
    iv. 7 foll., and the words (verse 23) {pneuma o Theos kai tous
    proskunountas auton en pneumati kai aletheia dei proskunein},
    which the philosopher Socrates would perhaps readily have assented
    to.

Soc. But now, with regard to human beings; is it allowable to deal with
men in any way one pleases? (12)

 (12) Or, "may a man deal with his fellow-men arbitrarily according to
    his fancy?" See above, II. vii. 8.

Euth. No; with regard to men also, he will be a law-observing man (13)
who knows what things are lawful as concerning men, in accordance with
which our dealings with one another must be conducted. (14)

 (13) Or, "he is a man full of the law (lawful) and law-abiding who
    knows," etc.

 (14) Reading {kath' a dei pros allelous khresthai}, subaud.
    {allelois}, or if vulg. {kath' a dei pos allelois khresthai},
    translate "must be specifically conducted."

Soc. Then those who deal with one another in this way, deal with each
other as they ought? (15)

 (15) "As they should and must."

Obviously (he answered).

Soc. And they who deal with one another as they ought, deal well and
nobly--is it not so?

Certainly (he answered).

Soc. And they who deal well and nobly by mankind are well-doers in
respect of human affairs?

That would seem to follow (he replied).

Soc. I presume that those who obey the laws do what is just and right?

Without a doubt, (he answered).

Soc. And by things right and just you know what sort of things are
meant?

What the laws ordain (he answered).

Soc. It would seem to follow that they who do what the laws ordain both
do what is right and just and what they ought? (16)

 (16) "What they should and must."

Euth. I see no alternative.

Soc. But then, he who does what is just and right is upright and just?
(17)

 (17) This proposition, as Kuhner argues (ad loc.), is important as
    being the middle term of the double syllogism (A and B)--

    A.  Those who do what the law demands concerning men do what is
        just and right.

        Those who do what is just and right are righteous and just.

        Ergo--Those who do what the law demands concerning men are
        righteous and just.

    B.  Those who know what is just and right ought (and are bound,
        cf. above, III. ix. 4) to do also what is just and right.

        Those who do what is just and right are righteous and just.

        Ergo--Righteous and Just ({dikaioi}) may be defined as "Those
        who know what the law demands (aliter things right and just)
        concerning men."

I should say so myself (he answered).

Soc. And should you say that any one obeys the laws without knowing what
the laws ordain?

I should not (he answered).

Soc. And do you suppose that any one who knows what things he ought to
do supposes that he ought not to do them? (18)

 (18) Or, "and no one who knows what he must and should do imagines
    that he must and should not do it?"

No, I suppose not (he answered).

Soc. And do you know of anybody doing other than what he feels bound to
do? (19)

 (19) Or, "and nobody that you know of does the contrary of what he
    thinks he should do?"

No, I do not (he answered).

Soc. It would seem that he who knows what things are lawful (20) as
concerning men does the things that are just and right?

 (20) Or, "of lawful obligation."

Without a doubt (he answered).

Soc. But then, he who does what is just and right is upright and just?
(21)

 (21) N.B.--In reference to this definition of justice, see K. Joel,
    op. cit. p. 323 foll., "Das ist eine Karrikatur des Sokratischen
    Dialogs."

Who else, if not? (he replied).

Soc. It would seem, then, we shall have got to a right definition if we
name as just and upright those who know the things which are lawful as
concerning men?

That is my opinion (he answered).

Soc. And what shall we say that wisdom is? Tell me, does it seem to you
that the wise are wise in what they know, (22) or are there any who are
wise in what they know not?

 (22) Or, "in that of which they have the knowledge ({episteme})."

Euth. Clearly they are wise in what they know; (23) for how could a man
have wisdom in that which he does not know?

 (23) Or, "their wisdom is confined to that of which they have the
    {episteme}. How could a man be wise in what he lacks the knowledge
    of?"

Soc. In fact, then, the wise are wise in knowledge?

Euth. Why, in what else should a man be wise save only in knowledge?

Soc. And is wisdom anything else than that by which a man is wise, think
you?

Euth. No; that, and that only, I think.

Soc. It would seem to follow that knowledge and wisdom are the same?

Euth. So it appears to me.

Soc. May I ask, does it seem to you possible for a man to know all the
things that are?

Euth. No, indeed! not the hundredth part of them, I should say.

Soc. Then it would seem that it is impossible for a man to be all-wise?

Quite impossible (he answered).

Soc. It would seem the wisdom of each is limited to his knowledge; each
is wise only in what he knows?

Euth. That is my opinion. (24)

 (24) Cf. Plat. "Theaet." 145 D. N.B.--For this definition of wisdom
    see K. Joel, ib. p. 324 foll.

Soc. Well! come now, Euthydemus, as concerning the good: ought we to
search for the good in this way?

What way? (he asked).

Soc. Does it seem to you that the same thing is equally advantageous to
all?

No, I should say not (he answered).

Soc. You would say that a thing which is beneficial to one is sometimes
hurtful to another?

Decidedly (he replied).

Soc. And is there anything else good except that which is beneficial,
should you say? (25)

 (25) Or reading (1) {allo d' an ti phaies e agathon einai to
    ophelimon}; or else (2) {allo d' an ti phaies agathon einai to
    ophelimon}; (in which case {alloti} = {allo ti e};) translate (1)
    "and what is beneficial is good (or a good), should you not say?"
    lit. "could you say that the beneficial is anything else than good
    (or a good)?" or else (2) "and what is beneficial is good (or a
    good)? or is it anything else?"

Nothing else (he answered).

Soc. It would seem to follow that the beneficial is good relatively to
him to whom it is beneficial?

That is how it appears to me (he answered).

Soc. And the beautiful: can we speak of a thing as beautiful in any
other way than relatively? or can you name any beautiful thing, body,
vessel, or whatever it be, which you know of as universally beautiful?
(26)

 (26) i.e. "beautiful in all relations into which it enters." Reading
    {to de kalon ekhoimen an pos allos eipein e estin onomazein kalon
    e soma e skeuos e all' otioun, o oistha pros tanta kalon on; Ma
    Di', ouk egog', ephe}. For other emendations of the vulg., and the
    many interpretations which have been given to the passage, see R.
    Kuhner ad loc.

Euth. I confess I do not know of any such myself. (27)

 (27) Or, adopting the reading {ekhois an} in place of {ekhoimen an}
    above, translate "I certainly cannot, I confess."

Soc. I presume to turn a thing to its proper use is to apply it
beautifully?

Euth. Undoubtedly it is a beautiful appliance. (28)

 (28) Or, "I presume it is well and good and beautiful to use this,
    that, and the other thing for the purpose for which the particular
    thing is useful?"--"That nobody can deny (he answered)." It is
    impossible to convey simply the verbal play and the quasi-
    argumentative force of the Greek {kalos ekhei pros ti tini
    khresthai}. See K. Joel, p. 426.

Soc. And is this, that, and the other thing beautiful for aught else
except that to which it may be beautifully applied?

Euth. No single thing else.

Soc. It would seem that the useful is beautiful relatively to that for
which it is of use?

So it appears to me (he answered).

Soc. And what of courage, (29) Euthydemus? I presume you rank courage
among things beautiful? It is a noble quality? (30)

 (29) Or, perhaps better, "fortitude." See H. Sidgwick, "Hist. of
    Ethics," p. 43.

 (30) It is one of {ta kala}. See K. Joel, ib. p. 325, and in reference
    to the definitions of the Good and of the Beautiful, ib. p. 425
    foll.

Nay, one of the most noble (he answered).

Soc. It seems that you regard courage as useful to no mean end?

Euth. Nay, rather the greatest of all ends, God knows.

Soc. Possibly in face of terrors and dangers you would consider it an
advantage to be ignorant of them?

Certainly not (he answered).

Soc. It seems that those who have no fear in face of dangers, simply
because they do not know what they are, are not courageous?

Most true (he answered); or, by the same showing, a large proportion of
madmen and cowards would be courageous.

Soc. Well, and what of those who are in dread of things which are not
dreadful, are they--

Euth. Courageous, Socrates?--still less so than the former, goodness
knows.

Soc. Possibly, then, you would deem those who are good in the face of
terrors and dangers to be courageous, and those who are bad in the face
of the same to be cowards?

Certainly I should (he answered).

Soc. And can you suppose any other people to be good in respect of such
things except those who are able to cope with them and turn them to
noble account? (31)

 (31) {kalos khresthai}, lit. "make a beautiful use of them."

No; these and these alone (he answered).

Soc. And those people who are of a kind to cope but badly with the same
occurrences, it would seem, are bad?

Who else, if not they? (he asked).

Soc. May it be that both one and the other class do use these
circumstances as they think they must and should? (32)

 (32) Or, "feel bound and constrained to do."

Why, how else should they deal with them? (he asked).

Soc. Can it be said that those who are unable to cope well with them or
to turn them to noble account know how they must and should deal with
them? (33)

 (33) Or, "Can it be said that those who are unable to cope nobly with
    their perilous surroundings know how they ought to deal with
    them?"

I presume not (he answered).

Soc. It would seem to follow that those who have the knowledge how to
behave are also those who have the power? (34)

 (34) "He who kens can."

Yes; these, and these alone (he said).

Soc. Well, but now, what of those who have made no egregious blunder (in
the matter); can it be they cope ill with the things and circumstances
we are discussing?

I think not (he answered).

Soc. It would seem, conversely, that they who cope ill have made some
egregious blunder?

Euth. Probably; indeed, it would appear to follow.

Soc. It would seem, then, that those who know (35) how to cope with
terrors and dangers well and nobly are courageous, and those who fail
utterly of this are cowards?

 (35) "Who have the {episteme}."

So I judge them to be (he answered). (36)

 (36) N.B.--For this definition of courage see Plat. "Laches," 195 A
    and passim; K. Joel, op. cit. p. 325 foll.

A kingdom and a tyranny (37) were, he opined, both of them forms of
government, but forms which differed from one another, in his belief; a
kingdom was a government over willing men in accordance with civil law,
whereas a tyranny implied the government over unwilling subjects not
according to law, but so as to suit the whims and wishes of the ruler.

 (37) Or, "despotism."

There were, moreover, three forms of citizenship or polity; in the
case where the magistrates were appointed from those who discharged the
obligations prescribed by law, he held the polity to be an aristocracy
(or rule of the best); (38) where the title to office depended on
rateable property, it was a plutocracy (or rule of wealth); and lastly,
where all the citizens without distinction held the reins of office,
that was a democracy (or rule of the people).

 (38) Or, "in which the due discharge of lawful (law-appointed)
    obligations gave the title to magisterial office and government,
    this form of polity he held to be an aristocracy (or rule of the
    best)." See Newman, op. cit. i. 212, 235.

Let me explain his method of reply where the disputant had no clear
statement to make, but without attempt at proof chose to contend
that such or such a person named by himself was wiser, or more of a
statesman, or more courageous, and so forth, than some other person.
(39) Socrates had a way of bringing the whole discussion back to the
underlying proposition, (40) as thus:

 (39) Or, "if any one encountered him in argument about any topic or
    person without any clear statement, but a mere ipse dixit, devoid
    of demonstration, that so and so," etc.

 (40) Or, "question at bottom." Cf. Plat. "Laws," 949 B.

Soc. You state that so and so, whom you admire, is a better citizen that
this other whom I admire?

The Disputant. Yes; I repeat the assertion.

Soc. But would it not have been better to inquire first what is the work
or function of a good citizen?

The Disputant. Let us do so.

Soc. To begin, then, with the matter of expenditure: his superiority
will be shown by his increasing the resources and lightening the
expenditure of the state? (41)

 (41) Or, "In the management of moneys, then, his strength will consist
    in his rendering the state better provided with ways and means?"

Certainly (the disputant would answer).

Soc. And in the event of war, by rendering his state superior to her
antagonists?

The Disputant. Clearly.

Soc. Or on an embassy as a diplomatist, I presume, by securing friends
in place of enemies?

That I should imagine (replies the disputant).

Soc. Well, and in parliamentary debate, by putting a stop to party
strife and fostering civic concord?

The Disputant. That is my opinion.

By this method of bringing back the argument to its true starting-point,
even the disputant himself would be affected and the truth become
manifest to his mind.

His own--that is, the Socratic--method of conducting a rational
discussion (42) was to proceed step by step from one point of general
agreement to another: "Herein lay the real security of reasoning," (43)
he would say; and for this reason he was more successful in winning the
common assent of his hearers than any one I ever knew. He had a saying
that Homer had conferred on Odyesseus the title of a safe, unerring
orator, (44) because he had the gift to lead the discussion from one
commonly accepted opinion to another.

 (42) Of, "of threading the mazes of an argument."

 (43) Reading {tauton asphaleian}; aliter. {tauten ten asphaleian} =
    "that this security was part and parcel of reasoning."

 (44) "Od." viii. 171, {o d' asphaleos agoreuei}, "and his speech runs
    surely on its way" (Butcher and Lang), where Odysseus is
    describing himself. Cf. Dion. Hal. "de Arte Rhet." xi. 8.


VII

The frankness and simplicity with which Socrates endeavoured to declare
his own opinions, in dealing with those who conversed with him, (1) is,
I think, conclusively proved by the above instances; at the same time,
as I hope now to show, he was no less eager to cultivate a spirit of
independence in others, which would enable them to stand alone in all
transactions suited to their powers.

 (1) Or, "who frequented his society, is, I hope, clear from what has
    been said."

Of all the men I have ever known, he was most anxious to ascertain in
what any of those about him was really versed; and within the range of
his own knowledge he showed the greatest zeal in teaching everything
which it befits the true gentleman (2) to know; or where he was
deficient in knowledge himself, (3) he would introduce his friends to
those who knew. (4) He did not fail to teach them also up to what point
it was proper for an educated man to acquire empiric knowledge of any
particular matter. (5)

 (2) Lit. "a beautiful and good man."

 (3) Or, "where he lacked acquaintance with the matter himself." See,
    for an instance, "Econ." iii. 14.

 (4) "To those who had the special knowledge"; "a connoisseur in the
    matter."

 (5) Or, "of any particular branch of learning"; "in each department of
    things."

To take geometry as an instance: Every one (he would say) ought to be
taught geometry so far, at any rate, as to be able, if necessary, to
take over or part with a piece of land, or to divide it up or assign a
portion of it for cultivation, (6) and in every case by geometric rule.
(7) That amount of geometry was so simple indeed, and easy to learn,
that it only needed ordinary application of the mind to the method of
mensuration, and the student could at once ascertain the size of the
piece of land, and, with the satisfaction of knowing its measurement,
depart in peace. But he was unable to approve of the pursuit of geometry
up to the point at which it became a study of unintelligible diagrams.
(8) What the use of these might be, he failed, he said, to see; and
yet he was not unversed in these recondite matters himself. (9) These
things, he would say, were enough to wear out a man's life, and to
hinder him from many other more useful studies. (10)

 (6) {e ergon apodeixasthai}, or "and to explain the process." Cf.
    Plat. "Rep." vii. 528 D. See R. Kuhner ad loc. for other
    interpretations of the phrase. Cf. Max. Tyr. xxxvii. 7.

 (7) Or, "by correct measurement"; lit. "by measurement of the earth."

 (8) Cf. Aristot. "Pol." v. (viii.) 2; Cic. "Acad. Post." I. iv. 15.
    For the attitude compare the attitude of a philosopher in other
    respects most unlike Socrates--August Comte, e.g. as to the
    futility of sidereal astronomy, "Pos. Pol." i. 412 (Bridges).

 (9) Cf. Isocr. "On the Antidosis," 258-269, as to the true place of
    "Eristic" in education. See above, IV. ii. 10.

 (10) Cf. A. Comte as to "perte intellectuelle" in the pursuit of
    barren studies.

Again, a certain practical knowledge of astronomy, a certain skill in
the study of the stars, he strongly insisted on. Every one should know
enough of the science to be able to discover the hour of the night or
the season of the month or year, for the purposes of travel by land or
sea--the march, the voyage, and the regulations of the watch; (11) and
in general, with regard to all matters connected with the night season,
or with the month, or the year, (12) it was well to have such reliable
data to go upon as would serve to distinguish the various times and
seasons. But these, again, were pieces of knowledge easily learnt from
night sportsmen, (13) pilots of vessels, and many others who make it
their business to know such things. As to pushing the study of astronomy
so far as to include a knowledge of the movements of bodies outside
our own orbit, whether planets or stars of eccentric movement, (14) or
wearing oneself out endeavouring to discover their distances from
the earth, their periods, and their causes, (15) all this he strongly
discountenanced; for he saw (he said) no advantage in these any more
than in the former studies. And yet he was not unversed (16) in the
subtleties of astronomy any more than in those of geometry; only these,
again, he insisted, were sufficient to wear out a man's lifetime, and to
keep him away from many more useful pursuits.

 (11) Schneid. cf. Plat. "Rep." vii. 527 D.

 (12) "Occurrences connected with the night, the month, or year." e.g.
    the festival of the Karneia, the {tekmerion} (point de repere) of
    which is the full moon of August. Cf. Eur. "Alc." 449.

 (13) See Plat. "Soph." 220 D; above, III. xi. 8; "Cyrop." I. vi. 40;
    "Hunting," xii. 6; Hippocr. "Aer." 28.

 (14) See Lewis, "Astron. of the Ancients"; cf. Diog. Laert. vii. 1.
    144.

 (15) Or, "the causes of these."

 (16) {oude touton ge anekoos en}. He had "heard," it is said,
    Archelaus, a pupil of Anaxagoras. Cf. Cic. "Tusc." V. iv. 10.

And to speak generally, in regard of things celestial he set his face
against attempts to excogitate the machinery by which the divine power
formed its several operations. (17) Not only were these matters beyond
man's faculties to discover, as he believed, but the attempt to search
out what the gods had not chosen to reveal could hardly (he supposed)
be well pleasing in their sight. Indeed, the man who tortured his brains
about such subjects stood a fair chance of losing his wits entirely,
just as Anaxagoras, (18) the headiest speculator of them all, in his
attempt to explain the divine mechanism, had somewhat lost his head.
Anaxagoras took on himself to assert that sun and fire are identical,
(19) ignoring the fact that human beings can easily look at fire, but to
gaze steadily into the face of the sun is given to no man; or that under
the influence of his rays the colour of the skin changes, but under the
rays of fire not. (20) He forgot that no plant or vegetation springs
from earth's bosom with healthy growth without the help of sunlight,
whilst the influence of fire is to parch up everything, and to destroy
life; and when he came to speak of the sun as being a "red-hot stone" he
ignored another fact, that a stone in fire neither lights up nor lasts,
whereas the sun-god abides for ever with intensist brilliancy undimmed.

 (17) Or, "he tried to divert one from becoming overly-wise in heavenly
    matters and the 'mecanique celeste' of the Godhead in His several
    operations." See above, I. i. 11. See Grote, "Plato," i. 438.

 (18) Of Clazomenae. Cf. Plat. "Apol." 14; Diog. Laert. II. vi; Cic.
    "Tusc." V. iv. 10; Cobet, "Prosop. Xen." s.n.; Grote, "H. G." i.
    501.

 (19) Or, "that the sun was simply a fire, forgetting so simple a fact
    as that."

 (20) Or, "the complexion darkens, whereas fire has no such effect."

Socrates inculcated the study of reasoning processes, (21) but in these,
equally with the rest, he bade the student beware of vain and idle
over-occupation. Up to the limit set by utility, he was ready to join
in any investigation, and to follow out an argument with those who were
with him; but there he stopped. He particularly urged those who were
with him to pay the utmost attention to health. They would learn all
it was possible to learn from adepts, and not only so, but each one
individually should take pains to discover, by a lifelong observation of
his own case, what particular regimen, what meat or drink, or what kind
of work, best suited him; these he should turn to account with a view to
leading the healthiest possible life. It would be no easy matter for
any one who would follow this advice, and study his own idiosyncrasy,
to find a doctor to improve either on the diagnosis or the treatment
requisite. (22)

 (21) {logismous} = (1) "arithmetic," (2) "calculation," (3)
    "syllogistic reasoning." See L. Dind. "Index. Gr." s.v., and
    Kuhner ad loc.; cf. Plat. "Gorg." 451 C. It is important to decide
    which form of "logism" is meant here.

 (22) Or, "to find a doctor better able than himself to 'diagnose' and
    prescribe a treatment congenial to health." Cf. Tac. "Ann." vi.
    46; Plut. "de San." 136 E, ap. Schneid. ad loc.

Where any one came seeking for help which no human wisdom could supply,
he would counsel him to give heed to "divination." He who has the secret
of the means whereby the gods give signs to men touching their affairs
can never surely find himself bereft of heavenly guidance.


VIII

Now if any one should be disposed to set the statement of Socrates
touching the divinity (1) which warned him what he ought to do or not
to do, against the fact that he was sentenced to death by the board of
judges, and argue that thereby Socrates stood convicted of lying and
delusion in respect of this "divinity" of his, I would have him to note
in the first place that, at the date of his trial, Socrates was already
so far advanced in years that had he not died then his life would have
reached its natural term soon afterwards; and secondly, as matters went,
he escaped life's bitterest load (2) in escaping those years which
bring a diminution of intellectual force to all--instead of which he was
called upon to exhibit the full robustness of his soul and acquire glory
in addition, (3) partly by the style of his defence--felicitous alike in
its truthfulness, its freedom, and its rectitude (4)--and partly by
the manner in which he bore the sentence of condemnation with infinite
gentleness and manliness. Since no one within the memory of man, it is
admitted, ever bowed his head to death more nobly. After the sentence he
must needs live for thirty days, since it was the month of the "Delia,"
(5) and the law does not suffer any man to die by the hand of the public
executioner until the sacred embassy return from Delos. During the whole
of that period (as his acquaintances without exception can testify)
his life proceeded as usual. There was nothing to mark the difference
between now and formerly in the even tenour of its courage; and it was
a life which at all times had been a marvel of cheerfulness and calm
content. (6)

 (1) Or, "the words of Socrates with regard to a divine something which
    warned him," etc.

 (2) The phraseology is poetical.

 (3) Or, "in a manner which redounded to his glory."

 (4) Or, "marvellous alike for the sincerity of its language, the free
    unbroken spirit of its delivery, and the absolute rectitude of the
    speaker."

 (5) i.e. the lesser "Delian" solemnities, an annual festival
    instituted, it was said, by Theseus. See Plut. "Theseus," 23
    (Clough, i. 19); and for the whole matter see Plat. "Phaed." 58
    foll.

 (6) Cf. Arist. "Frogs," 82; of Sophocles, {o d' eukolos men enthad',
    eukolos d' ekei}.

 (Let us pause and ask how could man die more nobly and more
beautifully than in the way described? or put it thus: dying so,
then was his death most noble and most beautiful; and being the most
beautiful, then was it also the most fortunate and heaven-blest; and
being most blessed of heaven, then was it also most precious in the
sight of God.) (7)

 (7) This is bracketed as spurious by Sauppe and other commentators.
    But see "Cyrop." VIII. ii. 7, 8, for similar ineptitude of style.
    R. Kuhner defends the passage as genuine.

And now I will mention further certain things which I have heard from
Hermogenes, the son of Hipponicus, (8) concerning him. He said that even
after Meletus (9) had drawn up the indictment, he himself used to hear
Socrates conversing and discussing everything rather than the suit
impending, and had ventured to suggest that he ought to be considering
the line of his defence, to which, in the first instance, the master
answered: "Do I not seem to you to have been practising that my whole
life long?" And upon his asking "How?" added in explanation that he had
passed his days in nothing else save in distinguishing between what is
just and what is unjust (right and wrong), and in doing what is right
and abstaining from what is wrong; "which conduct" (he added) "I hold
to be the finest possible practice for my defence"; and when he
(Hermogenes), returning to the point again, pleaded with Socrates: "Do
you not see, Socrates, how commonly it happens that an Athenian jury,
under the influence of argument, condemns innocent people to death and
acquits real criminals?"--Socrates replied, "I assure you, Hermogenes,
that each time I have essayed to give my thoughts to the defence which I
am to make before the court, the divinity (10) has opposed me." And when
he (Hermogenes) exclaimed, "How strange!"--"Do you find it strange" (he
continued), "that to the Godhead it should appear better for me to close
my life at once? Do you not know that up to the present moment there
is no man whom I can admit to have spent a better or happier life than
mine. Since theirs I regard as the best of lives who study best to
become as good as may be, and theirs the happiest who have the liveliest
sense of growth in goodness; and such, hitherto, is the happy fortune
which I perceive to have fallen to my lot. To such conclusion I have
come, not only in accidental intercourse with others, but by a strict
comparison drawn between myself and others, and in this faith I
continue to this day; and not I only, but my friends continue in a like
persuasion with regard to me, not for the lame reason that they are
my friends and love me (or else would others have been in like case as
regards their friends), but because they are persuaded that by being
with me they will attain to their full height of goodness. But, if I am
destined to prolong my days, maybe I shall be enforced to pay in full
the penalties of old age--to see and hear less keenly, to fail in
intellectual force, and to leave school, as it were, more of a dunce
than when I came, less learned and more forgetful--in a word, I shall
fall from my high estate, and daily grow worse in that wherein aforetime
I excelled. But indeed, were it possible to remain unconscious of the
change, the life left would scarcely be worth living; but given that
there is a consciousness of the change, then must the existence left to
live be found by comparison insipid, joyless, a death in life, devoid of
life's charm. But indeed, if it is reserved for me to die unjustly, then
on those who unjustly slay me lies the shame (since, given injustice is
base, how can any unjust action whatsoever fail of baseness?) (11) But
for me what disgrace is it that others should fail of a just decision
and right acts concerning me?... I see before me a long line of
predecessors on this road, and I mark the reputation also among
posterity which they have left. (12) I note how it varies according as
they did or suffered wrong, and for myself I know that I too, although I
die to-day, shall obtain from mankind a consideration far different from
that which will be accorded to those who put me to death. I know that
undying witness will be borne me to this effect, that I never at any
time did wrong to any man, or made him a worse man, but ever tried to
make those better who were with me."

 (8) See above, II. x. 3; "Symp." i. 3; iii. 14; iv. 47 foll.; vi. 2;
    "Apol." 2; Plat. "Crat." 384.

 (9) See above, I. i. 1.

 (10) {to daimonion}--"the divine (voice)."

 (11) This passage also may, perhaps, be regarded as spurious.

 (12) Or, "There floats before my eyes a vision of the many who have
    gone this same gate. I note their legacies of fame among
    posterity."

Such are the words which he spoke in conversation with Hermogenes and
the rest. But amongst those who knew Socrates and recognised what manner
of man he was, all who make virtue and perfection their pursuit still to
this day cease not to lament his loss with bitterest regret, as for one
who helped them in the pursuit of virtue as none else could.

To me, personally, he was what I have myself endeavoured to describe: so
pious and devoutly religious (13) that he would take no step apart
from the will of heaven; so just and upright that he never did even a
trifling injury to any living soul; so self-controlled, so temperate,
that he never at any time chose the sweeter in place of the better; so
sensible, and wise, and prudent that in distinguishing the better from
the worse he never erred; nor had he need of any helper, but for the
knowledge of these matters, his judgment was at once infallible and
self-sufficing. Capable of reasonably setting forth and defining moral
questions, (14) he was also able to test others, and where they erred,
to cross-examine and convict them, and so to impel and guide them in the
path of virtue and noble manhood. With these characteristics, he seemed
to be the very impersonation of human perfection and happiness. (15)

 (13) Or, "of such piety and religious devotedness... of such
    rectitude... of such sobreity and self-control... of such
    sound sense and wisdom..."

 (14) Or, "gifted with an ability logically to set forth and to define
    moral subtleties."

 (15) Or, "I look upon him as at once the best and happiest of men."

Such is our estimate. If the verdict fail to satisfy I would ask those
who disagree with it to place the character of any other side by side
with this delineation, and then pass sentence.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Memorabilia, by Xenophon

