BOOK II


I

Now, if the effect of such discourses was, as I imagine, to deter his
hearers from the paths of quackery and false-seeming, (1) so I am
sure that language like the following was calculated to stimulate his
followers to practise self-control and endurance: self-control in
the matters of eating, drinking, sleeping, and the cravings of lust;
endurance of cold and heat and toil and pain. He had noticed the undue
licence which one of his acquaintances allowed himself in all such
matters. (2) Accordingly he thus addressed him:

 (1) This sentence in the Greek concludes Bk. I. There is something
    wrong or very awkward in the text here.

 (2) Cf. Grote, "Plato," III. xxxviii. p. 530.

Tell me, Aristippus (Socrates said), supposing you had two children
entrusted to you to educate, one of them must be brought up with an
aptitude for government, and the other without the faintest propensity
to rule--how would you educate them? What do you say? Shall we begin our
inquiry from the beginning, as it were, with the bare elements of food
and nutriment?

Ar. Yes, food to begin with, by all means, being a first principle, (3)
without which there is no man living but would perish.

 (3) Aristippus plays upon the word {arkhe}.

Soc. Well, then, we may expect, may we not, that a desire to grasp food
at certain seasons will exhibit itself in both the children?

Ar. It is to be expected.

Soc. Which, then, of the two must be trained, of his own free will, (4)
to prosecute a pressing business rather than gratify the belly?

 (4) {proairesis}.

Ar. No doubt the one who is being trained to govern, if we would not
have affairs of state neglected during (5) his government.

 (5) Lit. "along of."

Soc. And the same pupil must be furnished with a power of holding out
against thirst also when the craving to quench it comes upon him?

Ar. Certainly he must.

Soc. And on which of the two shall we confer such self-control in regard
to sleep as shall enable him to rest late and rise early, or keep vigil,
if the need arise?

Ar. To the same one of the two must be given that endurance also.

Soc. Well, and a continence in regard to matters sexual so great that
nothing of the sort shall prevent him from doing his duty? Which of them
claims that?

Ar. The same one of the pair again.

Soc. Well, and on which of the two shall be bestowed, as a further gift,
the voluntary resolution to face toils rather than turn and flee from
them?

Ar. This, too, belongs of right to him who is being trained for
government.

Soc. Well, and to which of them will it better accord to be taught all
knowledge necessary towards the mastery of antagonists?

Ar. To our future ruler certainly, for without these parts of learning
all his other capacities will be merely waste.

Soc. (6)Will not a man so educated be less liable to be entrapped by
rival powers, and so escape a common fate of living creatures, some
of which (as we all know) are hooked through their own greediness, and
often even in spite of a native shyness; but through appetite for
food they are drawn towards the bait, and are caught; while others are
similarly ensnared by drink?

 (6)  (SS. 4, 5, L. Dind. ed Lips.)

Ar. Undoubtedly.

Soc. And others again are victims of amorous heat, as quails, for
instance, or partridges, which, at the cry of the hen-bird, with
lust and expectation of such joys grow wild, and lose their power of
computing dangers: on they rush, and fall into the snare of the hunter?

Aristippus assented.

Soc. And would it not seem to be a base thing for a man to be affected
like the silliest bird or beast? as when the adulterer invades the
innermost sanctum (7) of the house, though he is well aware of the risks
which his crime involves, (8) the formidable penalties of the law,
the danger of being caught in the toils, and then suffering the direst
contumely. Considering all the hideous penalties which hang over the
adulterer's head, considering also the many means at hand to release him
from the thraldom of his passion, that a man should so drive headlong on
to the quicksands of perdition (9)--what are we to say of such frenzy?
The wretch who can so behave must surely be tormented by an evil spirit?
(10)

 (7) {eis as eirktas}. The penetralia.

 (8) Or, "he knows the risks he runs of suffering those penalties with
    which the law threatens his crime should he fall into the snare,
    and being caught, be mutilated."

 (9) Or, "leap headlong into the jaws of danger."

 (10) {kakodaimonontos}.

Ar. So it strikes me.

Soc. And does it not strike you as a sign of strange indifference that,
whereas the greater number of the indispensable affairs of men, as for
instance, those of war and agriculture, and more than half the rest,
need to be conducted under the broad canopy of heaven, (11) yet the
majority of men are quite untrained to wrestle with cold and heat?

 (11) Or, "in the open air."

Aristippus again assented.

Soc. And do you not agree that he who is destined to rule must train
himself to bear these things lightly?

Ar. Most certainly.

Soc. And whilst we rank those who are self-disciplined in all these
matters among persons fit to rule, we are bound to place those incapable
of such conduct in the category of persons without any pretension
whatsoever to be rulers?

Ar. I assent.

Soc. Well, then, since you know the rank peculiar to either section of
mankind, did it ever strike you to consider to which of the two you are
best entitled to belong?

Yes I have (replied Aristippus). I do not dream for a moment of ranking
myself in the class of those who wish to rule. In fact, considering how
serious a business it is to cater for one's own private needs, I look
upon it as the mark of a fool not to be content with that, but to
further saddle oneself with the duty of providing the rest of the
community with whatever they may be pleased to want. That, at the cost
of much personal enjoyment, a man should put himself at the head of a
state, and then, if he fail to carry through every jot and tittle of
that state's desire, be held to criminal account, does seem to me the
very extravagance of folly. Why, bless me! states claim to treat their
rulers precisely as I treat my domestic slaves. I expect my attendants
to furnish me with an abundance of necessaries, but not to lay a finger
on one of them themselves. So these states regard it as the duty of a
ruler to provide them with all the good things imaginable, but to keep
his own hands off them all the while. (12) So then, for my part, if
anybody desires to have a heap of pother himself, (13) and be a nuisance
to the rest of the world, I will educate him in the manner suggested,
and he shall take his place among those who are fit to rule; but for
myself, I beg to be enrolled amongst those who wish to spend their days
as easily and pleasantly as possible.

 (12) Or, "but he must have no finger in the pie himself."

 (13) See Kuhner ad loc.

Soc. Shall we then at this point turn and inquire which of the two are
likely to lead the pleasanter life, the rulers or the ruled?

Ar. By all means let us do so.

Soc. To begin then with the nations and races known to ourselves. (14)
In Asia the Persians are the rulers, while the Syrians, Phrygians,
Lydians are ruled; and in Europe we find the Scythians ruling, and the
Maeotians being ruled. In Africa (15) the Carthaginians are rulers, the
Libyans ruled. Which of these two sets respectively leads the happier
life, in your opinion? Or, to come nearer home--you are yourself a
Hellene--which among Hellenes enjoy the happier existence, think you,
the dominant or the subject states?

 (14) Or, "the outer world, the non-Hellenic races and nationalities of
    which we have any knowledge."

 (15) Lit. "Libya."

Nay, (16) I would have you to understand (exclaimed Aristippus) that I
am just as far from placing myself in the ranks of slavery; there is, I
take it, a middle path between the two which it is my ambition to tread,
avoiding rule and slavery alike; it lies through freedom--the high road
which leads to happiness.

 (16) Or, "Pardon me interrupting you, Socrates; but I have not the
    slightest intention of placing myself." See W. L. Newman, op. cit.
    i. 306.

Soc. True, if only your path could avoid human beings, as it avoids rule
and slavery, there would be something in what you say. But being placed
as you are amidst human beings, if you purpose neither to rule nor to be
ruled, and do not mean to dance attendance, if you can help it, on those
who rule, you must surely see that the stronger have an art to seat the
weaker on the stool of repentance (17) both in public and in private,
and to treat them as slaves. I daresay you have not failed to note this
common case: a set of people has sown and planted, whereupon in comes
another set and cuts their corn and fells their fruit-trees, and in
every way lays siege to them because, though weaker, they refuse to pay
them proper court, till at length they are persuaded to accept slavery
rather than war against their betters. And in private life also,
you will bear me out, the brave and powerful are known to reduce the
helpless and cowardly to bondage, and to make no small profit out of
their victims.

 (17) See "Symp." iii. 11; "Cyrop." II. ii. 14; Plat. "Ion," 535 E; L.
    Dindorf ad loc.

Ar. Yes, but I must tell you I have a simple remedy against all such
misadventures. I do not confine myself to any single civil community. I
roam the wide world a foreigner.

Soc. Well, now, that is a masterly stroke, upon my word! (18) Of course,
ever since the decease of Sinis, and Sciron, and Procrustes, (19)
foreign travellers have had an easy time of it. But still, if I bethink
me, even in these modern days the members of free communities do
pass laws in their respective countries for self-protection against
wrong-doing. Over and above their personal connections, they provide
themselves with a host of friends; they gird their cities about with
walls and battlements; they collect armaments to ward off evil-doers;
and to make security doubly sure, they furnish themselves with allies
from foreign states. In spite of all which defensive machinery these
same free citizens do occasionally fall victims to injustice. But you,
who are without any of these aids; you, who pass half your days on the
high roads where iniquity is rife; (20) you, who, into whatever city
you enter, are less than the least of its free members, and moreover are
just the sort of person whom any one bent on mischief would single out
for attack--yet you, with your foreigner's passport, are to be
exempt from injury? So you flatter yourself. And why? Will the state
authorities cause proclamation to be made on your behalf: "The person
of this man Aristippus is secure; let his going out and his coming in
be free from danger"? Is that the ground of your confidence? or do you
rather rest secure in the consciousness that you would prove such a
slave as no master would care to keep? For who would care to have in
his house a fellow with so slight a disposition to work and so strong
a propensity to extravagance? Suppose we stop and consider that very
point: how do masters deal with that sort of domestic? If I am not
mistaken, they chastise his wantonness by starvation; they balk his
thieving tendencies by bars and bolts where there is anything to steal;
they hinder him from running away by bonds and imprisonment; they drive
the sluggishness out of him with the lash. Is it not so? Or how do you
proceed when you discover the like tendency in one of your domestics?

 (18) Or, "Well foiled!" "A masterly fall! my prince of wrestlers."

 (19) For these mythical highway robbers, see Diod. iv. 59; and for
    Sciron in particular, Plut. "Theseus," 10.

 (20) Or, "where so many suffer wrong."

Ar. I correct them with all the plagues, till I force them to serve me
properly. But, Socrates, to return to your pupil educated in the royal
art, (21) which, if I mistake not, you hold to be happiness: how, may I
ask, will he be better off than others who lie in evil case, in spite
of themselves, simply because they suffer perforce, but in his case the
hunger and the thirst, the cold shivers and the lying awake at nights,
with all the changes he will ring on pain, are of his own choosing? For
my part I cannot see what difference it makes, provided it is one and
the same bare back which receives the stripes, whether the whipping be
self-appointed or unasked for; nor indeed does it concern my body in
general, provided it be my body, whether I am beleaguered by a whole
armament of such evils (22) of my own will or against my will--except
only for the folly which attaches to self-appointed suffering.

 (21) Cf. below, IV. ii. 11; Plat. "Statesm." 259 B; "Euthyd." 291 C;
    K. Joel, op. cit. p. 387 foll. "Aristippus anticipates Adeimantus"
    ("Rep." 419), W. L. Newman, op. cit. i. 395.

 (22) Cf. "suffers the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune."

Soc. What, Aristippus, does it not seem to you that, as regards such
matters, there is all the difference between voluntary and involuntary
suffering, in that he who starves of his own accord can eat when he
chooses, and he who thirsts of his own free will can drink, and so for
the rest; but he who suffers in these ways perforce cannot desist from
the suffering when the humour takes him? Again, he who suffers hardship
voluntarily, gaily confronts his troubles, being buoyed on hope
(23)--just as a hunter in pursuit of wild beasts, through hope of
capturing his quarry, finds toil a pleasure--and these are but prizes of
little worth in return for their labours; but what shall we say of their
reward who toil to obtain to themselves good friends, or to subdue their
enemies, or that through strength of body and soul they may administer
their households well, befriend their friends, and benefit the land
which gave them birth? Must we not suppose that these too will take
their sorrows lightly, looking to these high ends? Must we not suppose
that they too will gaily confront existence, who have to support them
not only their conscious virtue, but the praise and admiration of the
world? (24) And once more, habits of indolence, along with the fleeting
pleasures of the moment, are incapable, as gymnastic trainers say, of
setting up (25) a good habit of body, or of implanting in the soul any
knowledge worthy of account; whereas by painstaking endeavour in the
pursuit of high and noble deeds, as good men tell us, through endurance
we shall in the end attain the goal. So Hesiod somewhere says: (26)

    Wickedness may a man take wholesale with ease, smooth is the way
    and her dwelling-place is very nigh; but in front of virtue the
    immortal gods have placed toil and sweat, long is the path and
    steep that leads to her, and rugged at the first, but when the
    summit of the pass is reached, then for all its roughness the path
    grows easy.

 (23) Cf. above, I. vi. 8.

 (24) Or, "in admiration of themselves, the praise and envy of the
    world at large."

 (25) See Hippocrates, "V. Med." 18.

 (26) Hesiod, "Works and Days," 285. See Plat. "Prot." 340 C; "Rep."
    ii. 364 D; "Laws," iv. 718 E.

And Ephicharmus (27) bears his testimony when he says:

    The gods sell us all good things in return for our labours.

 (27) Epicharmus of Cos, the chief comic poet among the Dorians, fl.
    500 B.C. Cf. Plat. "Theaet." 152 E, "the prince of comedy";
    "Gorg." 505 D.

And again in another passage he exclaims:

    Set not thine heart on soft things, thou knave, lest thou light
    upon the hard.

And that wise man Prodicus (28) delivers himself in a like strain
concerning virtue in that composition of his about Heracles, which
crowds have listened to. (29) This, as far as I can recollect it, is the
substance at least of what he says:

 (28) Prodicus of Ceos. See Plat. "Men." 24; "Cratyl." 1; Philostr.
    "Vit. Soph." i. 12.

 (29) Or, "which he is fond of reciting as a specimen of style." The
    title of the {epideixis} was {'Orai} according to Suidas,
    {Prodikos}.

"When Heracles was emerging from boyhood into the bloom of youth, having
reached that season in which the young man, now standing upon the verge
of independence, shows plainly whether he will enter upon the path of
virtue or of vice, he went forth into a quiet place, and sat debating
with himself which of those two paths he should pursue; and as he there
sat musing, there appeared to him two women of great stature which drew
nigh to him. The one was fair to look upon, frank and free by gift
of nature, (30) her limbs adorned with purity and her eyes with
bashfulness; sobriety set the rhythm of her gait, and she was clad in
white apparel. The other was of a different type; the fleshy softness
of her limbs betrayed her nurture, while the complexion of her skin was
embellished that she might appear whiter and rosier than she really
was, and her figure that she might seem taller than nature made her;
she stared with wide-open eyes, and the raiment wherewith she was clad
served but to reveal the ripeness of her bloom. With frequent glances
she surveyed her person, or looked to see if others noticed her; while
ever and anon she fixed her gaze upon the shadow of herself intently.

 (30) Reading {eleutherion phusei,...} or if {eleutherion,
    phusei...} translate "nature had adorned her limbs..."

"Now when these two had drawn near to Heracles, she who was first
named advanced at an even pace (31) towards him, but the other, in her
eagerness to outstrip her, ran forward to the youth, exclaiming, 'I see
you, Heracles, in doubt and difficulty what path of life to choose; make
me your friend, and I will lead you to the pleasantest road and easiest.
This I promise you: you shall taste all of life's sweets and escape all
bitters. In the first place, you shall not trouble your brain with
war or business; other topics shall engage your mind; (32) your only
speculation, what meat or drink you shall find agreeable to your palate;
what delight (33) of ear or eye; what pleasure of smell or touch; what
darling lover's intercourse shall most enrapture you; how you shall
pillow your limbs in softest slumber; how cull each individual pleasure
without alloy of pain; and if ever the suspicion steal upon you that the
stream of joys will one day dwindle, trust me I will not lead you where
you shall replenish the store by toil of body and trouble of soul. No!
others shall labour, but you shall reap the fruit of their labours; you
shall withhold your hand from nought which shall bring you gain. For to
all my followers I give authority and power to help themselves freely
from every side.'

 (31) Or, "without change in her demeanour."

 (32) Reading {diese}, or {dioisei}, "you shall continue speculating
    solely."

 (33) It will be recollected that Prodicus prided himself on {orthotes
    onomaton}. Possibly Xenophon is imitating (caricaturing?) his
    style. {terphtheies, estheies, euphrantheies}.

"Heracles hearing these words made answer: 'What, O lady, is the name
you bear?' To which she: 'Know that my friends call be Happiness,
but they that hate me have their own nicknames (34) for me, Vice and
Naughtiness.'

 (34) So the vulg. {upokorizomenoi} is interpreted. Cobet ("Pros. Xen."
    p. 36) suggests {upoknizomenoi} = "quippe qui desiderio
    pungantur."

"But just then the other of those fair women approached and spoke:
'Heracles, I too am come to you, seeing that your parents are well
known to me, and in your nurture I have gauged your nature; wherefore I
entertain good hope that if you choose the path which leads to me, you
shall greatly bestir yourself to be the doer of many a doughty deed of
noble emprise; and that I too shall be held in even higher honour for
your sake, lit with the lustre shed by valorous deeds. (35) I will not
cheat you with preludings of pleasure, (36) but I will relate to you the
things that are according to the ordinances of God in very truth. Know
then that among things that are lovely and of good report, not one have
the gods bestowed upon mortal men apart from toil and pains. Would
you obtain the favour of the gods, then must you pay these same gods
service; would you be loved by your friends, you must benefit these
friends; do you desire to be honoured by the state, you must give the
state your aid; do you claim admiration for your virtue from all Hellas,
you must strive to do some good to Hellas; do you wish earth to yield
her fruits to you abundantly, to earth must you pay your court; do you
seek to amass riches from your flocks and herds, on them must you bestow
your labour; or is it your ambition to be potent as a warrior, able to
save your friends and to subdue your foes, then must you learn the arts
of war from those who have the knowledge, and practise their application
in the field when learned; or would you e'en be powerful of limb and
body, then must you habituate limbs and body to obey the mind, and
exercise yourself with toil and sweat.'

 (35) Or, "bathed in the splendour of thy virtues."

 (36) Or, "honeyed overtures of pleasure."

"At this point, (as Prodicus relates) Vice broke in exclaiming: 'See
you, Heracles, how hard and long the road is by which yonder woman would
escort you to her festal joys. (37) But I will guide you by a short and
easy road to happiness.'

 (37) Hesiod, "Theog." 909; Milton, "L'Allegro," 12.

"Then spoke Virtue: 'Nay, wretched one, what good thing hast thou? or
what sweet thing art thou acquainted with--that wilt stir neither hand
nor foot to gain it? Thou, that mayest not even await the desire of
pleasure, but, or ever that desire springs up, art already satiated;
eating before thou hungerest, and drinking before thou thirsteth; who to
eke out an appetite must invent an army of cooks and confectioners; and
to whet thy thirst must lay down costliest wines, and run up and down
in search of ice in summer-time; to help thy slumbers soft coverlets
suffice not, but couches and feather-beds must be prepared thee and
rockers to rock thee to rest; since desire for sleep in thy case springs
not from toil but from vacuity and nothing in the world to do. Even the
natural appetite of love thou forcest prematurely by every means thou
mayest devise, confounding the sexes in thy service. Thus thou educatest
thy friends: with insult in the night season and drowse of slumber
during the precious hours of the day. Immortal, thou art cast forth
from the company of gods, and by good men art dishonoured: that sweetest
sound of all, the voice of praise, has never thrilled thine ears; and
the fairest of all fair visions is hidden from thine eyes that have
never beheld one bounteous deed wrought by thine own hand. If thou
openest thy lips in speech, who will believe thy word? If thou hast need
of aught, none shall satisfy thee. What sane man will venture to join
thy rablle rout? Ill indeed are thy revellers to look upon, young men
impotent of body, and old men witless in mind: in the heyday of life
they batten in sleek idleness, and wearily do they drag through an age
of wrinkled wretchedness: and why? they blush with shame at the thought
of deeds done in the past, and groan for weariness at what is left to
do. During their youth they ran riot through their sweet things, and
laid up for themselves large store of bitterness against the time of
eld. But my companionship is with the gods; and with the good among men
my conversation; no bounteous deed, divine or human, is wrought without
my aid. Therefore am I honoured in Heaven pre-eminently, and upon
earth among men whose right it is to honour me; (38) as a beloved
fellow-worker of all craftsmen; a faithful guardian of house and lands,
whom the owners bless; a kindly helpmeet of servants; (39) a brave
assistant in the labours of peace; an unflinching ally in the deeds of
war; a sharer in all friendships indispensable. To my friends is given
an enjoyment of meats and drinks, which is sweet in itself and devoid
of trouble, in that they can endure until desire ripens, and sleep more
delicious visits them than those who toil not. Yet they are not pained
to part with it; nor for the sake of slumber do they let slip the
performance of their duties. Among my followers the youth delights in
the praises of his elders, and the old man glories in the honour of the
young; with joy they call to memory their deeds of old, and in to-day's
well-doing are well pleased. For my sake they are dear in the sight
of God, beloved of their friends and honoured by the country of their
birth. When the appointed goal is reached they lie not down in oblivion
with dishonour, but bloom afresh--their praise resounded on the lips of
men for ever. (40) Toils like these, O son of noble parents, Heracles,
it is yours to meet with, and having endured, to enter into the heritage
assured you of transcendant happiness.'"

 (38) Reading {ois prosekei}, or if {proseko}, translate "to whom I am
    attached."

 (39) Cf. "Econ." v. 8.

 (40) Or, "so true is it, a branch is left them; undying honour to
    their name!"

This, Aristippus, in rough sketch is the theme which Prodicus pursues
(41) in his "Education of Heracles by Virtue," only he decked out
his sentiments, I admit, in far more magnificent phrases than I have
ventured on. Were it not well, Aristippus, to lay to heart these
sayings, and to strive to bethink you somewhat of that which touches the
future of our life?

 (41) Reading {diokei}, al. {diokei} = "so Prodicus arranged the parts
    of his discourse."


II

At another time, he had noticed the angry temper shown by Lamprocles,
the elder of his sons, towards their mother, and thus addressed himself
to the lad.

Soc. Pray, my son, did you ever hear of certain people being called
ungrateful?

That I have (replied the young man).

Soc. And have you understood what it is they do to get that bad name?

Lamp. Yes, I have: when any one has been kindly treated, and has it in
his power to requite the kindness but neglects to do so, men call him
ungrateful.

Soc. And you admit that people reckon the ungrateful among wrongdoers?

Lamp. I do.

Soc. And has it ever struck you to inquire whether, as regards the right
or wrong of it, ingratitude may not perhaps resemble some such conduct
as the enslavement, say, of prisoners, which is accounted wrong towards
friends but justifiable towards enemies?

Lamp. Yes, I have put that question to myself. In my opinion, no matter
who confers the kindness, friend or foe, the recipient should endeavour
to requite it, failing which he is a wrongdoer.

Soc. Then if that is how the matter stands, ingratitude would be an
instance of pure unadulterate wrongdoing?

Lamprocles assented to the proposition.

Soc. It follows, then, that in proportion to the greatness of the
benefit conferred, the greater his misdoing who fails to requite the
kindness?

Lamprocles again assented.

Socrates continued: And where can we hope to find greater benefits than
those which children derive from their parents--their father and mother
who brought them out of nothingness into being, who granted them to look
upon all these fair sights, and to partake of all those blessings which
the gods bestow on man, things so priceless in our eyes that one and all
we shudder at the thought of leaving them, and states have made death
the penalty for the greatest crimes, because there is no greater evil
through fear of which to stay iniquity.

You do not suppose that human beings produce children for the sake of
carnal pleasure (1) merely; were this the motive, street and bordell are
full of means to quit them of that thrall; whereas nothing is plainer
than the pains we take to seek out wives who shall bear us the finest
children. (2) With these we wed, and carry on the race. The man has a
twofold duty to perform: partly in cherishing her who is to raise up
children along with him, and partly towards the children yet unborn
in providing them with things that he thinks will contribute to their
well-being--and of these as large a store as possible. The woman,
conceiving, bears her precious burthen with travail and pain, and at the
risk of life itself--sharing with that within her womb the food on which
she herself is fed. And when with much labour she has borne to the end
and brought forth her offspring, she feeds it and watches over it with
tender care--not in return for any good thing previously received, for
indeed the babe itself is little conscious of its benefactor and cannot
even signify its wants; only she, the mother, making conjecture of what
is good for it, and what will please it, essays to satisfy it; (3)
and for many months she feeds it night and day, enduring the toil nor
recking what return she shall receive for all her trouble. Nor does the
care and kindness of parents end with nurture; but when the children
seem of an age to learn, they teach them themselves whatever cunning
they possess, as a guide to life, or where they feel that another is
more competent, to him they send them to be taught at their expense.
Thus they watch over their children, doing all in their power to enable
them to grow up to be as good as possible.

 (1) Lit. "the joys of Aphrodite."

 (2) "For the procreation of children." See below, IV. iv. 22; "Pol.
    Lac." i.

 (3) Lit. "to leave nought lacking."

So be it (the youth answered); but even if she have done all that,
and twenty times as much, no soul on earth could endure my mother's
cross-grained temper.

Then Socrates: Which, think you, would be harder to bear--a wild beast's
savagery or a mother's?

Lamp. To my mind, a mother's--at least if she be such as mine.

Soc. Dear me! And has this mother ever done you any injury--such as
people frequently receive from beasts, by bite or kick?

Lamp. If she has not done quite that, she uses words which any one would
sooner sell his life than listen to.

Soc. And how many annoyances have you caused your mother, do you
suppose, by fretfulness and peevishness in word and deed, night and day,
since you were a little boy? How much sorrow and pain, when you were
ill?

Lamp. Well, I never said or did anything to bring a blush to her cheeks.

Soc. No, come now! Do you suppose it is harder for you to listen to your
mother's speeches than for actor to listen to actor on the tragic stage,
(4) when the floodgates of abuse are opened?

 (4) See Grote, "H. G." viii. 457; Plut. "Solon," xxix.

Lamp. Yes; for the simple reason that they know it is all talk on their
parts. The inquisitor may cross-question, but he will not inflict
a fine; the threatener may hurl his menaces, but he will do no
mischief--that is why they take it all so easily.

Soc. Then ought you to fly into a passion, who know well enough that,
whatever your mother says, she is so far from meaning you mischief that
she is actually wishing blessings to descend upon you beyond all others?
Or do you believe that your mother is really ill disposed towards you?

Lamp. No, I do not think that.

Soc. Then this mother, who is kindly disposed to you, and takes such
tender care of you when you are ill to make you well again, and to see
that you want for nothing which may help you; and, more than all, who is
perpetually pleading for blessings in your behalf and offering her vows
to Heaven (5)--can you say of her that she is cross-grained and harsh?
For my part, I think, if you cannot away with such a mother, you cannot
away with such blessings either.

 (5) Or, "paying vows."

But tell me (he proceeded), do you owe service to any living being,
think you? or are you prepared to stand alone? Prepared not to please or
try to please a single soul? to follow none? To obey neither general nor
ruler of any sort? Is that your attitude, or do you admit that you owe
allegiance to somebody?

Lamp. Yes; certainly I owe allegiance.

Soc. May I take it that you are willing to please at any rate your
neighbour, so that he may kindle a fire for you in your need, may prove
himself a ready helpmate in good fortune, or if you chance on evil and
are stumbling, may friendlily stand by your side to aid?

Lamp. I am willing.

Soc. Well, and what of that other chance companion--your
fellow-traveller by land or sea? what of any others, you may light upon?
is it indifferent to you whether these be friends or not, or do you
admit that the goodwill of these is worth securing by some pains on your
part?

Lamp. I do.

Soc. It stands thus then: you are prepared to pay attention to this,
that, and the other stranger, but to your mother who loves you more than
all else, you are bound to render no service, no allegiance? Do you
not know that whilst the state does not concern itself with ordinary
ingratitude or pass judicial sentence on it; whilst it overlooks the
thanklessness of those who fail to make return for kindly treatment, it
reserves its pains and penalties for the special case? If a man render
not the service and allegiance due to his parents, on him the finger
of the law is laid; his name is struck off the roll; he is forbidden to
hold the archonship--which is as much as to say, "Sacrifices in behalf
of the state offered by such a man would be no offerings, being tainted
with impiety; nor could aught else be 'well and justly' performed
of which he is the doer." Heaven help us! If a man fail to adorn the
sepulchre of his dead parents the state takes cognisance of the matter,
and inquisition is made in the scrutiny of the magistrates. (6) And as
for you, my son, if you are in your sober senses, you will earnestly
entreat your mother, lest the very gods take you to be an ungrateful
being, and on their side also refuse to do you good; and you will beware
of men also, lest they should perceive your neglect of your parents, and
with one consent hold you in dishonour; (7) and so you find yourself in
a desert devoid of friends. For if once the notion be entertained that
here is a man ungrateful to his parents, no one will believe that any
kindness shown you would be other than thrown away.

 (6) Lit. "the docimasia." See Gow, "Companion," xiv.

 (7) "Visiti with atimia."


III

At another time the differences between two brothers named Chaerephon
and Chaerecrates, both well known to him, had drawn his attention; and
on seeing the younger of the two he thus addressed him.

Soc. Tell me, Chaerecrates, you are not, I take it, one of those strange
people who believe that goods are better and more precious than a
brother; (1) and that too although the former are but senseless chattels
which need protection, the latter a sensitive and sensible being who
can afford it; and what is more, he is himself alone, whilst as for them
their name is legion. And here again is a marvellous thing: that a man
should count his brother a loss, because the goods of his brother are
not his; but he does not count his fellow-citizens loss, and yet their
possessions are not his; only it seems in their case he has wits to see
that to dwell securely with many and have enough is better than to own
the whole wealth of a community and to live in dangerous isolation; but
this same doctrine as applied to brothers they ignore. Again, if a
man have the means, he will purchase domestic slaves, because he wants
assistants in his work; he will acquire friends, because he needs their
support; but this brother of his--who cares about brothers? It seems
a friend may be discovered in an ordinary citizen, but not in a blood
relation who is also a brother. And yet it is a great vantage-ground
towards friendship to have sprung from the same loins and to have been
suckled at the same breasts, since even among beasts a certain natural
craving, and sympathy springs up between creatures reared together. (2)
Added to which, a man who has brothers commands more respect from the
rest of the world than the man who has none, and who must fight his own
battles. (3)

 (1) Cf. "Merchant of Venice," II. viii. 17: "Justice! the law! my
    ducats, and my daughter!"

 (2) Or, "a yearning after their foster-brothers manifests itself in
    animals." See "Cyrop." VIII. vii. 14 foll. for a parallel to this
    discussion.

 (3) Lit. "and is less liable to hostility."

Chaer. I daresay, Socrates, where the differences are not profound,
reason would a man should bear with his brother, and not avoid him for
some mere trifle's sake, for a brother of the right sort is, as you say,
a blessing; but if he be the very antithesis of that, why should a man
lay his hand to achieve the impossible?

Soc. Well now, tell me, is there nobody whom Chaerephon can please any
more than he can please yourself; or do some people find him agreeable
enough?

Chaer. Nay, there you hit it. That is just why I have a right to detest
him. He can be pleasing enough to others, but to me, whenever he appears
on the scene, he is not a blessing--no! but by every manner of means the
reverse.

Soc. May it not happen that just as a horse is no gain to the inexpert
rider who essays to handle him, so in like manner, if a man tries to
deal with his brother after an ignorant fashion, this same brother will
kick?

Chaer. But is it likely now? How should I be ignorant of the art of
dealing with my brother if I know the art of repaying kind words and
good deeds in kind? But a man who tries all he can to annoy me by word
and deed, I can neither bless nor benefit, and, what is more, I will not
try.

Soc. Well now, that is a marvellous statement, Chaerecrates. Your dog,
the serviceable guardian of your flocks, who will fawn and lick the hand
of your shepherd, when you come near him can only growl and show his
teeth. Well; you take no notice of the dog's ill-temper, you try to
propitiate him by kindness; but your brother? If your brother were what
he ought to be, he would be a great blessing to you--that you admit;
and, as you further confess, you know the secret of kind acts and words,
yet you will not set yourself to apply means to make him your best of
friends.

Chaer. I am afraid, Socrates, that I have no wisdom or cunning to make
Chaerephon bear himself towards me as he should.

Soc. Yet there is no need to apply any recondite or novel machinery.
Only bait your hook in the way best known to yourself, and you will
capture him; whereupon he will become your devoted friend.

Chaer. If you are aware that I know some love-charm, Socrates, of which
I am the happy but unconscious possessor, pray make haste and enlighten
me.

Soc. Answer me then. Suppose you wanted to get some acquaintance to
invite you to dinner when he next keeps holy day, (4) what steps would
you take?

 (4) "When he next does sacrifice"; see "Hiero," viii. 3. Cf. Theophr.
    "Char." xv. 2, and Prof. Jebb's note ad loc.

Chaer. No doubt I should set him a good example by inviting him myself
on a like occasion.

Soc. And if you wanted to induce some friend to look after your affairs
during your absence abroad, how would you achieve your purpose?

Chaer. No doubt I should present a precedent in undertaking to look
after his in like circumstances.

Soc. And if you wished to get some foreign friend to take you under his
roof while visiting his country, what would you do?

Chaer. No doubt I should begin by offering him the shelter of my own
roof when he came to Athens, in order to enlist his zeal in furthering
the objects of my visit; it is plain I should first show my readiness to
do as much for him in a like case.

Soc. Why, it seems you are an adept after all in all the philtres known
to man, only you chose to conceal your knowledge all the while; or is
it that you shrink from taking the first step because of the scandal you
will cause by kindly advances to your brother? And yet it is commonly
held to redound to a man's praise to have outstripped an enemy in
mischief or a friend in kindness. Now if it seemed to me that Chaerephon
were better fitted to lead the way towards this friendship, (5) I
should have tried to persuade him to take the first step in winning your
affection, but now I am persuaded the first move belongs to you, and to
you the final victory.

 (5) Reading {pros ten philian}, or if {phusin}, transl. "natural
    disposition."

Chaer. A startling announcement, Socrates, from your lips, and most
unlike you, to bid me the younger take precedence of my elder brother.
Why, it is contrary to the universal custom of mankind, who look to the
elder to take the lead in everything, whether as a speaker or an actor.

Soc. How so? Is it not the custom everywhere for the younger to step
aside when he meets his elder in the street and to give him place? Is he
not expected to get up and offer him his seat, to pay him the honour of
a soft couch, (6) to yield him precedence in argument?

 (6) Lit. "with a soft bed," or, as we say, "the best bedroom."

My good fellow, do not stand shilly-shallying, (7) but put out your hand
caressingly, and you will see the worthy soul will respond at once with
alacrity. Do you not note your brother's character, proud and frank and
sensitive to honour? He is not a mean and sorry rascal to be caught by a
bribe--no better way indeed for such riff-raff. No! gentle natures need
a finer treatment. You can best hope to work on them by affection.

 (7) Or, "have no fears, essay a soothing treatment."

Chaer. But suppose I do, and suppose that, for all my attempts, he shows
no change for the better?

Soc. At the worst you will have shown yourself to be a good, honest,
brotherly man, and he will appear as a sorry creature on whom kindness
is wasted. But nothing of the sort is going to happen, as I conjecture.
My belief is that as soon as he hears your challenge, he will embrace
the contest; pricked on by emulous pride, he will insist upon getting
the better of you in kindness of word and deed.

At present you two are in the condition of two hands formed by God to
help each other, but which have let go their business and have turned to
hindering one another all they can. You are a pair of feet fashioned on
the Divine plan to work together, but which have neglected this in order
to trammel each other's gait. Now is it not insensate stupidity (8) to
use for injury what was meant for advantage? And yet in fashioning
two brothers God intends them, methinks, to be of more benefit to one
another than either two hands, or two feet, or two eyes, or any other
of those pairs which belong to man from his birth. (9) Consider how
powerless these hands of ours if called upon to combine their action at
two points more than a single fathom's length apart; (10) and these feet
could not stretch asunder (11) even a bare fathom; and these eyes, for
all the wide-reaching range we claim for them, are incapable of seeing
simultaneously the back and front of an object at even closer quarters.
But a pair of brothers, linked in bonds of amity, can work each for the
other's good, though seas divide them. (12)

 (8) "Boorishness verging upon monomania."

 (9) "With which man is endowed at birth."

 (10) "More than an 'arms'-stretch' asunder."

 (11) Lit. "reach at one stretch two objects, even over that small
    distance."

 (12) "Though leagues separate them."


IV

I have at another time heard him discourse on the kindred theme of
friendship in language well calculated, as it seemed to me, to help a
man to choose and also to use his friends aright.

He (Socrates) had often heard the remark made that of all possessions
there is none equal to that of a good and sincere friend; but, in spite
of this assertion, the mass of people, as far as he could see, concerned
themselves about nothing so little as the acquisition of friends.
Houses, and fields, and slaves, and cattle, and furniture of all sorts
(he said) they were at pains to acquire, and they strove hard to keep
what they had got; but to procure for themselves this greatest of all
blessings, as they admitted a friend to be, or to keep the friends whom
they already possessed, not one man in a hundred ever gave himself a
thought. It was noticeable, in the case of a sickness befalling a man's
friend and one of his own household simultaneously, the promptness with
which the master would fetch the doctor to his domestic, and take every
precaution necessary for his recovery, with much expenditure of pains;
but meanwhile little account would be taken of the friend in like
condition, and if both should die, he will show signs of deep annoyance
at the death of his domestic, which, as he reflects, is a positive loss
to him; but as regards his friend his position is in no wise materially
affected, and thus, though he would never dream of leaving his other
possessions disregarded and ill cared for, friendship's mute appeal is
met with flat indifference. (1)

 (1) Or, "the cry of a friend for careful tending falls on deaf ears."

Or to take (said he) a crowning instance: (2) with regard to ordinary
possessions, however multifarious these may be, most people are at least
acquainted with their number, but if you ask a man to enumerate his
friends, who are not so very many after all perhaps, he cannot; or if,
to oblige the inquirer, he essays to make a list, he will presently
retract the names of some whom he had previously included. (3) Such is
the amount of thought which people bestow upon their friends.

 (2) Or, "Nor had he failed to observe another striking contrast." Cf.
    Cic. "Lael." 17; Diog. Laert. ii. 30.

 (3) i.e. "like a chess-player recalling a move."

And yet what thing else may a man call his own is comparable to this one
best possession! what rather will not serve by contrast to enhance the
value of an honest friend! Think of a horse or a yoke of oxen; they have
their worth; but who shall gauge the worth of a worthy friend? Kindlier
and more constant than the faithfullest of slaves--this is that
possession best named all-serviceable. (4) Consider what the post is
that he assigns himself! to meet and supplement what is lacking to
the welfare of his friends, to promote their private and their public
interests, is his concern. Is there need of kindly action in any
quarter? he will throw in the full weight of his support. Does some
terror confound? he is at hand to help and defend by expenditure of
money and of energy, (5) by appeals to reason or resort to force. His
the privilege alike to gladden the prosperous in the hour of success and
to sustain their footing who have well-nigh slipped. All that the hands
of a man may minister, all that the eyes of each are swift to see, the
ears to hear, and the feet to compass, he with his helpful arts will not
fall short of. Nay, not seldom that which a man has failed to accomplish
for himself, has missed seeing or hearing or attaining, a friend acting
in behalf of friend will achieve vicariously. And yet, albeit to try and
tend a tree for the sake of its fruit is not uncommon, this copious mine
of wealth--this friend--attracts only a lazy and listless attention on
the part of more than half the world.

 (4) "A vessel fit for all work indeed is this friend." Cf. Ar. "Ach."
    936, {pagkhreston aggos estai}, like the "leather bottel."

 (5) Or, "by dint of his diplomacy."


V

I remember listening to another argument of his, the effect of which
would be to promote self-examination. The listener must needs be brought
to ask himself, "Of what worth am I to my friends?" It happened thus.
One of those who were with him was neglectful, as he noted, of a friend
who was at the pinch of poverty (Antisthenes). (1) Accordingly, in the
presence of the negligent person and of several others, he proceeded to
question the sufferer.

 (1) Antisthenes, "cynicorum et stoicorum parens." Cic. "de Or." iii.
    17; "ad Att." xii. 38. See below, III. iii. 17; "Symp." passim;
    Diog. Laert. II. v.; VI. i.

Soc. What say you, Antisthenes?--have friends their values like domestic
slaves? One of these latter may be worth perhaps two minae, (2) another
only half a mina, a third five, and a fourth as much as ten; while they
do say that Nicias, (3) the son of Niceratus, paid a whole talent for
a superintendent of his silver mines. And so I propound the question to
myself as follows: "Have friends, like slaves, their market values?"

 (2) A mina = L4 circ.

 (3) For Nicias see Thuc. vii. 77 foll.; "Revenues," iv. 14; Plut.
    "Nic." IV. v.; Lys. "de bon. Aristoph." 648.

Not a doubt of it (replied Antisthenes). At any rate, I know that I
would rather have such a one as my friend than be paid two minae, and
there is such another whose worth I would not estimate at half a mina,
and a third with whom I would not part for ten, and then again a fourth
whose friendship would be cheap if it cost me all the wealth and pains
in the world to purchase it.

Well then (continued Socrates), if that be so, would it not be well if
every one were to examine himself: "What after all may I chance to be
worth to my friends?" Should he not try to become as dear as possible,
so that his friends will not care to give him up? How often do I hear
the complaint: "My friend So-and-so has given me up"; or "Such an one,
whom I looked upon as a friend, has sacrificed me for a mina." And every
time I hear these remarks, the question arises in my mind: If the vendor
of a worthless slave is ready to part with him to a purchaser for what
he will fetch--is there not at least a strong temptation to part with a
base friend when you have a chance of making something on the exchange?
Good slaves, as far as I can see, are not so knocked down to the hammer;
no, nor good friends so lightly parted with.


VI

Again, in reference to the test to be applied, if we would gauge the
qualifications of a friend worth the winning, the following remarks of
Socrates could not fail, I think, to prove instructive. (1)

 (1) Or, "Again, as to establishing a test of character, since a friend
    worth having must be of a particular type, I cannot but think that
    the following remarks would prove instructive."

Tell me (said Socrates, addressing Critobulus), supposing we stood in
need of a good friend, how should we set about his discovery? We
must, in the first place, I suppose, seek out one who is master of his
appetites, not under the dominion, that is, of his belly, not addicted
to the wine-cup or to lechery or sleep or idleness, since no one
enslaved to such tyrants could hope to do his duty either by himself or
by his friends, could he?

Certainly not (Critobulus answered).

Soc. Do you agree, then, that we must hold aloof from every one so
dominated?

Cri. Most assuredly.

Well then (proceeded Socrates), what shall we say of the spendthrift who
has lost his independence and is for ever begging of his neighbours;
if he gets anything out of them he cannot repay, but if he fails to get
anything, he hates you for not giving--do you not think that this man
too would prove but a disagreeable friend?

Cri. Certainly.

Soc. Then we must keep away from him too?

Cri. That we must.

Soc. Well! and what of the man whose strength lies in monetary
transactions? (2) His one craving is to amass money; and for that reason
he is an adept at driving a hard bargain (3)--glad enough to take in,
but loath to pay out.

 (2) Or, "the money-lender? He has a passion for big money-bags."

 (3) Or, "hard in all his dealings."

Cri. In my opinion he will prove even a worse fellow than the last.

Soc. Well! and what of that other whose passion for money-making is so
absorbing that he has no leisure for anything else, save how he may add
to his gains?

Cri. Hold aloof from him, say I, since there is no good to be got out of
him or his society.

Soc. Well! what of the quarrelsome and factious person (4) whose main
object is to saddle his friends with a host of enemies?

 (4) "The partisan."

Cri. For God's sake let us avoid him also.

Soc. But now we will imagine a man exempt indeed from all the above
defects--a man who has no objection to receive kindnesses, but it never
enters into his head to do a kindness in return.

Cri. There will be no good in him either. But, Socrates, what kind of
man shall we endeavour to make our friend? what is he like?

Soc. I should say he must be just the converse of the above: he has
control over the pleasures of the body, he is kindly disposed, (5)
upright in all his dealings, (6) very zealous is he not to be outdone in
kindness by his benefactors, if only his friends may derive some profit
from his acquaintance.

 (5) Reading {eunous}, or if {euorkos}, transl. "a man of his word."

 (6) Or, "easy to deal with."

Cri. But how are we to test these qualities, Socrates, before
acquaintance?

Soc. How do we test the merits of a sculptor?--not by inferences drawn
from the talk of the artist merely. No, we look to what he has already
achieved. These former statues of his were nobly executed, and we trust
he will do equally well with the rest.

Cri. You mean that if we find a man whose kindness to older friends
is established, we may take it as proved that he will treat his newer
friends as amiably?

Soc. Why, certainly, if I see a man who has shown skill in the handling
of horses previously, I argue that he will handle others no less
skilfully again.

Cri. Good! and when we have discovered a man whose friendship is worth
having, how ought we to make him our friend?

Soc. First we ought to ascertain the will of Heaven whether it be
advisable to make him our friend.

Cri. Well! and how are we to effect the capture of this friend of our
choice, whom the gods approve? will you tell me that?

Not, in good sooth (replied Socrates), by running him down like a hare,
nor by decoying him like a bird, or by force like a wild boar. (7) To
capture a friend against his will is a toilsome business, and to bind
him in fetters like a slave by no means easy. Those who are so treated
are apt to become foes instead of friends. (8)

 (7) Reading {kaproi}, al. {ekhthroi}, "an enemy."

 (8) Or, "Hate rather than friendship is the outcome of these methods."

Cri. But how convert them into friends?

Soc. There are certain incantations, we are told, which those who know
them have only to utter, and they can make friends of whom they list;
and there are certain philtres also which those who have the secret of
them may administer to whom they like and win their love.

Cri. From what source shall we learn them?

Soc. You need not go farther than Homer to learn that which the Sirens
sang to Odysseus, (9) the first words of which run, I think, as follows:

    Hither, come hither, thou famous man, Odysseus, great glory of the
    Achaeans!

 (9) "Od." xii. 184.

Cri. And did the magic words of this spell serve for all men alike? Had
the Sirens only to utter this one incantation, and was every listener
constrained to stay?

Soc. No; this was the incantation reserved for souls athirst for fame,
of virtue emulous.

Cri. Which is as much as to say, we must suit the incantation to the
listener, so that when he hears the words he shall not think that the
enchanter is laughing at him in his sleeve. I cannot certainly conceive
a method better calculated to excite hatred and repulsion than to go
to some one who knows that he is small and ugly and a weakling, and to
breathe in his ears the flattering tale that he is beautiful and tall
and stalwart. But do you know any other love-charms, Socrates?

Soc. I cannot say that I do; but I have heard that Pericles (10) was
skilled in not a few, which he poured into the ear of our city and won
her love.

 (10) See above, I. ii. 40; "Symp." viii. 39.

Cri. And how did Themistocles (11) win our city's love?

 (11) See below, III. vi. 2; IV. ii. 2.

Soc. Ah, that was not by incantation at all. What he did was to encircle
our city with an amulet of saving virtue. (12)

 (12) See Herod. vii. 143, "the wooden wall"; Thuc. i. 93, "'the walls'
    of Athens."

Cri. You would imply, Socrates, would you not, that if we want to win
the love of any good man we need to be good ourselves in speech and
action?

And did you imagine (replied Socrates) that it was possible for a bad
man to make good friends?

Cri. Why, I could fancy I had seen some sorry speech-monger who was fast
friends with a great and noble statesman; or again, some born commander
and general who was boon companion with fellows quite incapable of
generalship. (13)

 (13) Or, "Why, yes, when I see some base orator fast friends with a
    great leader of the people; or, again, some fellow incapable of
    generalship a comrade to the greatest captains of his age."

Soc. But in reference to the point we were discussing, may I ask whether
you know of any one who can attach a useful friend to himself without
being of use in return? (14) Can service ally in friendship with
disservice?

 (14) Add, "Can service ally in friendship with disservice? Must there
    not be a reciprocity of service to make friendship lasting?"

Cri. In good sooth no. But now, granted it is impossible for a base man
to be friends with the beautiful and noble, (14) I am concerned at once
to discover if one who is himself of a beautiful and noble character
can, with a wave of the hand, as it were, attach himself in friendship
to every other beautiful and noble nature.

 (14) {kalous kagathous}.

Soc. What perplexes and confounds you, Critobulus, is the fact that
so often men of noble conduct, with souls aloof from baseness, are not
friends but rather at strife and discord with one another, and deal more
harshly by one another than they would by the most good-for-nothing of
mankind.

Cri. Yes, and this holds true not of private persons only, but states,
the most eager to pursue a noble policy and to repudiate a base one,
are frequently in hostile relation to one another. As I reason on
these things my heart fails me, and the question, how friends are to
be acquired, fills me with despondency. The bad, as I see, cannot be
friends with one another. For how can such people, the ungrateful, or
reckless, or covetous, or faithless, or incontinent, adhere together as
friends? Without hesitation I set down the bad as born to be foes not
friends, and as bearing the birthmark of internecine hate. But then
again, as you suggest, no more can these same people harmonise in
friendship with the good. For how should they who do evil be friends
with those who hate all evil-doing? And if, last of all, they that
cultivate virtue are torn by party strife in their struggle for the
headship of the states, envying one another, hating one another, who are
left to be friends? where shall goodwill and faithfulness be found among
men?

Soc. The fact is there is some subtlety in the texture of these things.
(15) Seeds of love are implanted in man by nature. Men have need of
one another, feel pity, help each other by united efforts, and in
recognition of the fact show mutual gratitude. But there are seeds of
war implanted also. The same objects being regarded as beautiful or
agreeable by all alike, they do battle for their possession; a spirit of
disunion (16) enters, and the parties range themselves in adverse camps.
Discord and anger sound a note of war: the passion of more-having,
staunchless avarice, threatens hostility; and envy is a hateful fiend.
(17)

 (15) i.e. a cunning intertwining of the threads of warp and woof.

 (16) Cf. Shelley, "The devil of disunion in their souls."

 (17) The diction is poetical.

But nevertheless, through all opposing barriers friendship steals her
way and binds together the beautiful and good among mankind. (18) Such
is their virtue that they would rather possess scant means painlessly
than wield an empire won by war. In spite of hunger and thirst they will
share their meat and drink without a pang. Not bloom of lusty youth, nor
love's delights can warp their self-control; nor will they be tempted
to cause pain where pain should be unknown. It is theirs not merely
to eschew all greed of riches, not merely to make a just and lawful
distribution of wealth, but to supply what is lacking to the needs of
one another. Theirs it is to compose strife and discord not in painless
oblivion simply, but to the general advantage. Theirs also to hinder
such extravagance of anger as shall entail remorse hereafter. And as to
envy they will make a clean sweep and clearance of it: the good things
which a man possesses shall be also the property of his friends, and the
goods which they possess are to be looked upon as his. Where then is
the improbability that the beautiful and noble should be sharers in the
honours (19) of the state not only without injury, but even to their
mutual advantage?

 (18) Or, as we say, "the elite of human kind."

 (19) "And the offices."

They indeed who covet and desire the honours and offices in a state
for the sake of the liberty thereby given them to embezzle the public
moneys, to deal violently by their fellow-creatures, and to batten in
luxury themselves, may well be regarded as unjust and villainous persons
incapable of harmony with one another. But if a man desire to obtain
these selfsame honours in order that, being himself secure against
wrong-doing, he may be able to assist his friends in what is right, and,
raised to a high position, (20) may essay to confer some blessing on the
land of his fathers, what is there to hinder him from working in harmony
with some other of a like spirit? Will he, with the "beautiful and
noble" at his side, be less able to aid his friends? or will his
power to benefit the community be shortened because the flower of that
community are fellow-workers in that work? Why, even in the contests
of the games it is obvious that if it were possible for the stoutest
combatants to combine against the weakest, the chosen band would come
off victors in every bout, and would carry off all the prizes. This
indeed is against the rules of the actual arena; but in the field of
politics, where the beautiful and good hold empery, and there is nought
to hinder any from combining with whomsoever a man may choose to benefit
the state, it will be a clear gain, will it not, for any one engaged
in state affairs to make the best men his friends, whereby he will find
partners and co-operators in his aims instead of rivals and antagonists?
And this at least is obvious: in case of foreign war a man will need
allies, but all the more if in the ranks opposed to him should stand the
flower of the enemy. (21) Moreover, those who are willing to fight
your battles must be kindly dealt with, that goodwill may quicken to
enthusiasm; and one good man (22) is better worth your benefiting that a
dozen knaves, since a little kindness goes a long way with the good, but
with the base the more you give them the more they ask for.

 (20) "As archon," or "raised to rule."

 (21) Lit. "the beautiful and good."

 (22) Or, "the best, though few, are better worth your benefiting than
    the many base."

So keep a good heart, Critobulus; only try to become good yourself, and
when you have attained, set to your hand to capture the beautiful and
good. Perhaps I may be able to give you some help in this quest, being
myself an adept in Love's lore. (23) No matter who it is for whom my
heart is aflame; in an instant my whole soul is eager to leap forth.
With vehemence I speed to the mark. I, who love, demand to be loved
again; this desire in me must be met by counter desire in him; this
thirst for his society by thirst reciprocal for mine. And these will
be your needs also, I foresee, whenever you are seized with longing to
contract a friendship. Do not hide from me, therefore, whom you would
choose as a friend, since, owing to the pains I take to please him
who pleases me, I am not altogether unversed, I fancy, in the art of
catching men. (24)

 (23) "An authority in matters of love." Cf. Plat. "Symp." 177 D; Xen.
    "Symp." viii. 2.

 (24) See below, III. xi. 7; cf. Plat. "Soph." 222; N. T. Matt. iv. 19,
    {alieis anthropon}.

Critobulus replied: Why, these are the very lessons of instruction,
Socrates, for which I have been long athirst, and the more particularly
if this same love's lore will enable me to capture those who are good of
soul and those who are beautiful of person.

Soc. Nay, now I warn you, Critobulus, it is not within the province of
my science to make the beautiful endure him who would lay hands upon
them. And that is why men fled from Scylla, I am persuaded, because she
laid hands upon them; but the Sirens were different--they laid hands on
nobody, but sat afar off and chanted their spells in the ears of all;
and therefore, it is said, all men endured to listen, and were charmed.

Cri. I promise I will not lay violent hands on any; therefore, if you
have any good device for winning friends, instruct your pupil.

Soc. And if there is to be no laying on of the hands, there must be no
application either of the lips; is it agreed?

Cri. No, nor application of the lips to any one--not beautiful.

Soc. See now! you cannot open your mouth without some luckless
utterance. Beauty suffers no such liberty, however eagerly the ugly may
invite it, making believe some quality of soul must rank them with the
beautiful.

Cri. Be of good cheer then; let the compact stand thus: "Kisses for the
beautiful, and for the good a rain of kisses." So now teach us the art
of catching friends.

Soc. Well then, when you wish to win some one's affection, you will
allow me to lodge information against you to the effect that you admire
him and desire to be his friend?

Cri. Lodge the indictment, with all my heart. I never heard of any one
who hated his admirers.

Soc. And if I add to the indictment the further charge that through your
admiration you are kindly disposed towards him, you will not feel I am
taking away your character?

Cri. Why, no; for myself I know a kindly feeling springs up in my heart
towards any one whom I conceive to be kindly disposed to me.

Soc. All this I shall feel empowered to say about you to those whose
friendship you seek, and I can promise further help; only there is a
comprehensive "if" to be considered: if you will further authorise me to
say that you are devoted to your friends; that nothing gives you so much
joy as a good friend; that you pride yourself no less on the fine deeds
of those you love than on your own; and on their good things equally
with your own; that you never weary of plotting and planning to procure
them a rich harvest of the same; and lastly, that you have discovered
a man's virtue is to excel his friends in kindness and his foes in
hostility. If I am authorised thus to report of you, I think you will
find me a serviceable fellow-hunter in the quest of friends, which is
the conquest of the good.

Cri. Why this appeal to me?--as if you had not free permission to say
exactly what you like about me.

Soc. No; that I deny, on the authority of Aspasia. (25) I have it from
her own lips. "Good matchmakers," she said tome, "were clever hands at
cementing alliances between people, provided the good qualities they
vouched for were truthfully reported; but when it came to their telling
lies, for her part she could not compliment them. (26) Their poor
deluded dupes ended by hating each other and the go-betweens as well."
Now I myself am so fully persuaded of the truth of this that I feel it
is not in my power to say aught in your praise which I cannot say with
truth.

 (25) Aspasia, daughter of Axiochus, of Miletus. See "Econ." iii. 14;
    Plat. "Menex." 235 E; Aesch. Socrat. ap. Cic. "de Invent." I.
    xxxi. 51. See Grote, "H. G." vi. 132 foll.; Cobet, "Pros. Xen."

 (26) Reading {ouk ethelein epainein}, or if {ouk ophelein epainousas}
    with Kuhner transl. "Good matchmakers, she told me, have to
    consult truth when reporting favourably of any one: then indeed
    they are terribly clever at bringing people together: whereas
    false flatterers do no good; their dupes," etc.

Cri. Really, Socrates, you are a wonderfully good friend to me--in so
far as I have any merit which will entitle me to win a friend, you will
lend me a helping hand, it seems; otherwise you would rather not forge
any petty fiction for my benefit.

Soc. But tell me, how shall I assist you best, think you? By praising
you falsely or by persuading you to try to be a good man? Or if it is
not plain to you thus, look at the matter by the light of some examples.
I wish to introduce you to a shipowner, or to make him your friend: I
begin by singing your praises to him falsely thus, "You will find him a
good pilot"; he catches at the phrase, and entrusts his ship to you,
who have no notion of guiding a vessel. What can you expect but to make
shipwreck of the craft and yourself together? or suppose by similar
false assertions I can persuade the state at large to entrust her
destinies to you--"a man with a fine genius for command," I say, "a
practised lawyer," "a politician born," and so forth. The odds are, the
state and you may come to grief through you. Or to take an instance
from everyday life. By my falsehoods I persuade some private person to
entrust his affairs to you as "a really careful and business-like
person with a head for economy." When put to the test would not your
administration prove ruinous, and the figure you cut ridiculous? No, my
dear friend, there is but one road, the shortest, safest, best, and it
is simply this: In whatsoever you desire to be deemed good, endeavour
to be good. For of all the virtues namable among men, consider, and
you will find there is not one but may be increased by learning and
practice. For my part then, Critobulus, these are the principles on
which we ought to go a-hunting; but if you take a different view, I am
all attention, please instruct me.

Then Critobulus: Nay, Socrates, I should be ashamed to gainsay what you
have said; if I did, it would neither be a noble statement nor a true.
(27)

 (27) {kala... alethe}.


VII

He had two ways of dealing with the difficulties of his friends: where
ignorance was the cause, he tried to meet the trouble by a dose of
common sense; or where want and poverty were to blame, by lessoning them
that they should assist one another according to their ability; and here
I may mention certain incidents which occurred within my own knowledge.
How, for instance, he chanced upon Aristarchus wearing the look of one
who suffered from a fit of the "sullens," and thus accosted him.

Soc. You seem to have some trouble on your mind, Aristarchus; if so, you
should share it with your friends. Perhaps together we might lighten the
weight of it a little.

Aristarchus answered: Yes, Socrates, I am in sore straits indeed. Ever
since the party strife declared itself in the city, (1) what with the
rush of people to Piraeus, and the wholesale banishments, I have been
fairly at the mercy of my poor deserted female relatives. Sisters,
nieces, cousins, they have all come flocking to me for protection. I
have fourteen free-born souls, I tell you, under my single roof, and how
are we to live? We can get nothing out of the soil--that is in the hands
of the enemy; nothing from my house property, for there is scarcely a
living soul left in the city; my furniture? no one will buy it; money?
there is none to be borrowed--you would have a better chance to find
it by looking for it on the road than to borrow it from a banker. Yes,
Socrates, to stand by and see one's relatives die of hunger is hard
indeed, and yet to feed so many at such a pinch impossible.

 (1) i.e. circa 404-403 B.C. See "Hell." II. iv.

After he listened to the story, Socrates asked: How comes it that
Ceramon, (2) with so many mouths to feed, not only contrives to furnish
himself and them with the necessaries of life, but to realise a handsome
surplus, whilst you being in like plight (3) are afraid you will one and
all perish of starvation for want of the necessaries of life?

 (2) An employer of labour, apparently, on a grand scale.

 (3) Lit. "with your large family to feed." L. Dindorf would like to
    read {su de oligous}, "you with your small family."

Ar. Why, bless your soul, do you not see he has only slaves and I have
free-born souls to feed?

Soc. And which should you say were the better human beings, the
free-born members of your household or Ceramon's slaves?

Ar. The free souls under my roof without a doubt.

Soc. Is it not a shame, then, that he with his baser folk to back
him should be in easy circumstances, while you and your far superior
household are in difficulties?

Ar. To be sure it is, when he has only a set of handicraftsmen to feed,
and I my liberally-educated household.

Soc. What is a handicraftsman? Does not the term apply to all who can
make any sort of useful product or commodity?

Ar. Certainly.

Soc. Barley meal is a useful product, is it not?

Ar. Pre-eminently so.

Soc. And loaves of bread?

Ar. No less.

Soc. Well, and what do you say to cloaks for men and for women--tunics,
mantles, vests? (4)

 (4) For these articles of dress see Becker's "Charicles," Exc. i. to
    Sc. xi. "Dress."

Ar. Yes, they are all highly useful commodities.

Soc. Then your household do not know how to make any of these?

Ar. On the contrary, I believe they can make them all.

Soc. Then you are not aware that by means of the manufacture of one of
these alone--his barley meal store--Nausicydes (5) not only maintains
himself and his domestics, but many pigs and cattle besides, and
realises such large profits that he frequently contributes to the state
benevolences; (6) while there is Cyrebus, again, who, out of a bread
factory, more than maintains the whole of his establishment, and lives
in the lap of luxury; and Demeas of Collytus gets a livelihood out of
a cloak business, and Menon as a mantua-maker, and so, again, more than
half the Megarians (7) by the making of vests.

 (5) Nausicydes. Cobet, "Pros. Xen." cf. Aristoph. "Eccles." 426.

 (6) Lit. "state liturgies," or "to the burden of the public services."
    For these see Gow, "Companion," xviii. "Athenian Finance."

 (7) Cf. Arist. "Acharnians," 519, {esukophantei Megareon ta
    khlaniskia}. See Dr. Merry's note ad loc.

Ar. Bless me, yes! They have got a set of barbarian fellows, whom they
purchase and keep, to manufacture by forced labour whatever takes their
fancy. My kinswomen, I need not tell you, are free-born ladies.

Soc. Then, on the ground that they are free-born and your kinswomen,
you think that they ought to do nothing but eat and sleep? Or is it your
opinion that people who live in this way--I speak of free-born people
in general--lead happier lives, and are more to be congratulated, than
those who give their time and attention to such useful arts of life as
they are skilled in? Is this what you see in the world, that for the
purpose of learning what it is well to know, and of recollecting the
lessons taught, or with a view to health and strength of body, or for
the sake of acquiring and preserving all that gives life its charm,
idleness and inattention are found to be helpful, whilst work and study
are simply a dead loss? Pray, when those relatives of yours were taught
what you tell me they know, did they learn it as barren information
which they would never turn to practical account, or, on the contrary,
as something with which they were to be seriously concerned some day,
and from which they were to reap advantage? Do human beings in general
attain to well-tempered manhood by a course of idling, or by carefully
attending to what will be of use? Which will help a man the more to grow
in justice and uprightness, to be up and doing, or to sit with folded
hands revolving the ways and means of existence? As things now stand,
if I am not mistaken, there is no love lost between you. You cannot help
feeling that they are costly to you, and they must see that you find
them a burthen? This is a perilous state of affairs, in which hatred and
bitterness have every prospect of increasing, whilst the pre-existing
bond of affection (8) is likely to be snapped.

 (8) Or, "the original stock of kindliness will be used up."

But now, if only you allow them free scope for their energies, when you
come to see how useful they can be, you will grow quite fond of them,
and they, when they perceive that they can please you, will cling to
their benefactor warmly. Thus, with the memory of former kindnesses
made sweeter, you will increase the grace which flows from kindnesses
tenfold; you will in consequence be knit in closer bonds of love and
domesticity. If, indeed, they were called upon to do any shameful work,
let them choose death rather than that; but now they know, it would
seem, the very arts and accomplishments which are regarded as the
loveliest and the most suitable for women; and the things which we know,
any of us, are just those which we can best perform, that is to say,
with ease and expedition; it is a joy to do them, and the result is
beautiful. (9) Do not hesitate, then, to initiate your friends in what
will bring advantage to them and you alike; probably they will gladly
respond to your summons.

 (9) Or, "with ease, rapidity, pleasure and effect."

Well, upon my word (Aristarchus answered), I like so well what you
say, Socrates, that though hitherto I have not been disposed to borrow,
knowing that when I had spent what I got I should not be in a condition
to repay, I think I can now bring myself to do so in order to raise a
fund for these works.

Thereupon a capital was provided; wools were purchased; the good man's
relatives set to work, and even whilst they breakfasted they worked, and
on and on till work was ended and they supped. Smiles took the place of
frowns; they no longer looked askance with suspicion, but full into each
other's eyes with happiness. They loved their kinsman for his kindness
to them. He became attached to them as helpmates; and the end of it all
was, he came to Socrates and told him with delight how matters fared;
"and now," he added, "they tax me with being the only drone in the
house, who sit and eat the bread of idleness."

To which Socrates: Why do not you tell them the fable of the dog? (10)
Once on a time, so goes the story, when beasts could speak, the sheep
said to her master, "What a marvel is this, master, that to us, your
own sheep, who provide you with fleeces and lambs and cheese, you give
nothing, save only what we may nibble off earth's bosom; but with this
dog of yours, who provides you with nothing of the sort, you share
the very meat out of your mouth." When the dog heard these words, he
answered promptly, "Ay, in good sooth, for is it not I who keep you safe
and sound, you sheep, so that you are not stolen by man nor harried by
wolves; since, if I did not keep watch over you, you would not be able
so much as to graze afield, fearing to be destroyed." And so, says
the tale, the sheep had to admit that the dog was rightly preferred to
themselves in honour. And so do you tell your flock yonder that like the
dog in the fable you are their guardian and overseer, and it is thanks
to you that they are protected from evil and evildoers, so that they
work their work and live their lives in blissful security.

 (10) See Joseph Jacobs, "The Fables of Aesop," vol. i. p. 26 foll.,
    for "a complete list of the Fables given in Greek literature up to
    the fall of Greek independence." Cf. Hesiod, "Works and Days," 202
    foll.; Archilochus, 89 (60), Bergk; Herod. i. 141; Aesch.
    "Myrmid." fr. 123; Aristot. "Rhet." II. xx.


VIII

At another time chancing upon an old friend whom he had not seen for a
long while, he greeted him thus.

Soc. What quarter of the world do you hail from, Eutherus?

The other answered: From abroad, just before the close of the war; but
at present from the city itself. (1) You see, since we have been denuded
of our possessions across the frontier, (2) and my father left me
nothing in Attica, I must needs bide at home, and provide myself with
the necessaries of life by means of bodily toil, which seems preferable
to begging from another, especially as I have no security on which to
raise a loan.

 (1) Lit. "from here." The conversation perhaps takes place in Piraeus
    404 B.C.

 (2) Or, "colonial possession." Cf. "Symp." iv. 31.

Soc. And how long do you expect your body to be equal to providing the
necessaries of life for hire?

Euth. Goodness knows, Socrates--not for long.

Soc. And when you find yourself an old man, expenses will not diminish,
and yet no one will care to pay you for the labour of your hands.

Euth. That is true.

Soc. Would it not be better then to apply yourself at once to such
work as will stand you in good stead when you are old--that is, address
yourself to some large proprietor who needs an assistant in managing his
estate? (3) By superintending his works, helping to get in his crops,
and guarding his property in general, you will be a benefit to the
estate and be benefited in return.

 (3) Cf. "Cyrop." VIII. iii. 48.

I could not endure the yoke of slavery, Socrates! (he exclaimed).

Soc. And yet the heads of departments in a state are not regarded as
adopting the badge of slavery because they manage the public property,
but as having attained a higher degree of freedom rather.

Euth. In a word, Socrates, the idea of being held to account to another
is not at all to my taste.

Soc. And yet, Eutherus, it would be hard to find a work which did
not involve some liability to account; in fact it is difficult to do
anything without some mistake or other, and no less difficult, if
you should succeed in doing it immaculately, to escape all unfriendly
criticism. I wonder now whether you find it easy to get through your
present occupations entirely without reproach. No? Let me tell you what
you should do. You should avoid censorious persons and attach yourself
to the considerate and kind-hearted, and in all your affairs accept
with a good grace what you can and decline what you feel you cannot do.
Whatever it be, do it heart and soul, and make it your finest work. (4)
There lies the method at once to silence fault-finders and to minister
help to your own difficulties. Life will flow smoothly, risks will be
diminished, provision against old age secured.

 (4) Or, "study to make it your finest work, the expression of a real
    enthusiasm."


IX

At another time, as I am aware, he had heard a remark made by Crito (1)
that life at Athens was no easy matter for a man who wished to mind his
own affairs.

 (1) Crito. See above, I. ii. 48; Cobet, "P. X."; cf. Plat. "Rep."
    viii. 549 C.

As, for instance, at this moment (Crito proceeded) there are a set
of fellows threatening me with lawsuits, not because they have any
misdemeanour to allege against me, but simply under the conviction that
I will sooner pay a sum of money than be troubled further.

To which Socrates replied: Tell me, Crito, you keep dogs, do you not, to
ward off wolves from your flocks?

Cr. Certainly; it pays to do so.

Soc. Then why do you not keep a watchman willing and competent to ward
off this pack of people who seek to injure you?

I should not at all mind (he answered), if I were not afraid he might
turn again and rend his keeper.

What! (rejoined Socrates), do you not see that to gratify a man like
yourself is far pleasanter as a matter of self-interest than to quarrel
with you? You may be sure there are plenty of people here who will take
the greatest pride in making you their friend.

Accordingly, they sought out Archedemus, (2) a practical man with a
clever tongue in his head (3) but poor; the fact being, he was not the
sort to make gain by hook or by crook, but a lover of honesty and of
too good a nature himself to make his living as a pettifogger. (4) Crito
would then take the opportunity of times of harvesting and put aside
small presents for Achedemus of corn and oil, or wine, or wool, or any
other of the farm produce forming the staple commodities of life, or he
would invite him to a sacrificial feast, and otherwise pay him marked
attention. Archedemus, feeling that he had in Crito's house a harbour
of refuge, could not make too much of his patron, and ere long he
had hunted up a long list of iniquities which could be lodged against
Crito's pettifogging persecutors themselves, and not only their numerous
crimes but their numerous enemies; and presently he prosecuted one of
them in a public suit, where sentence would be given against him "what
to suffer or what to pay." (5) The accused, conscious as he was of
many rascally deeds, did all he could to be quit of Archedemus, but
Archedemus was not to be got rid of. He held on until he had made the
informer not only loose his hold of Crito but pay himself a sum of
money; and now that Archedemus had achieved this and other similar
victories, it is easy to guess what followed. (6) It was just as when
some shepherd has got a very good dog, all the other shepherds wish
to lodge their flocks in his neighbourhood that they too may reap the
benefit of him. So a number of Crito's friends came begging him to allow
Archedemus to be their guardian also, and Archedemus was overjoyed to
do something to gratify Crito, and so it came about that not only Crito
abode in peace, but his friends likewise. If any of those people with
whom Archedemus was not on the best of terms were disposed to throw
it in his teeth that he accepted his patron's benefits and paid in
flatteries, he had a ready retort: "Answer me this question--which is
the more scandalous, to accept kindnesses from honest folk and to repay
them, with the result that I make such people my friends but quarrel
with knaves, or to make enemies of honourable gentlemen (7) by attempts
to do them wrong, with the off-chance indeed of winning the friendship
of some scamps in return for my co-operation, but the certainty of
losing in the tone of my acquaintances?" (8)

 (2) Archedemus, possibly the demagogue, "Hell." I. vii. 2. So Cobet,
    "P. X.," but see Grote, "H. G." viii. 245.

 (3) Lit. "very capable of speech and action"--the writer's favourite
    formula for the well-trained Athenian who can speak fluently and
    reason clearly, and act energetically and opportunely.

 (4) Reading {kai euphuesteros on}  (or {e os})... {apo sukophanton}
     (or {sukophantion}), after Cobet, "P. X." s.v. Archedemus. The
    MSS. give {kai ephe raston einai}--"nothing is easier," he said,
    "than recovering from sycophants."

 (5) For this formula cf. "Econ." vi. 24. Cf. Plat. "Statesm." 299 A.

 (6) {ede tote}. Cf. Plat. "Laws," vi. 778 C.

 (7) Lit. the {kaloi kagathoi}, which like {khrestous} and {ponerous}
    has a political as well as an ethical meaning.

 (8) Lit. "must associate with these (the {ponerois}) instead of those
    (the {kalois te kagathois}).

The net result of the whole proceedings was that Archedemus was now
Crito's right hand, (9) and by the rest of Crito's friends he was held
in honour.

 (9) He was No. 1--{eis}.


X

Again I may cite, as known to myself, (1) the following discussion; the
arguments were addressed to Diodorus, one of his companions. The master
said:

 (1) Or, "for which I can personally vouch."

Tell me, Diodorus, if one of your slaves runs away, are you at pains to
recover him?

More than that (Diodorus answered), I summon others to my aid and I have
a reward cried for his recovery.

Soc. Well, if one of your domestics is sick, do you tend him and call in
the doctors to save his life?

Diod. Decidedly I do.

Soc. And if an intimate acquaintance who is far more precious to you
than any of your household slaves is about to perish of want, you would
think it incumbent on you to take pains to save his life? Well! now you
know without my telling you that Hermogenes (2) is not made of wood or
stone. If you helped him he would be ashamed not to pay you in kind.
And yet--the opportunity of possessing a willing, kindly, and trusty
assistant well fitted to do your bidding, and not merely that, but
capable of originating useful ideas himself, with a certain forecast
of mind and judgment--I say such a man is worth dozens of slaves. Good
economists tell us that when a precious article may be got at a low
price we ought to buy. And nowadays when times are so bad it is possible
to get good friends exceedingly cheap.

 (2) Hermogenes, presumably the son of Hipponicus. See I. ii. 48.

Diodorus answered: You are quite right, Socrates; bid Hermogenes come to
me.

Soc. Bid Hermogenes come to you!--not I indeed! since for aught I can
understand you are no better entitled to summon him that to go to him
yourself, nor is the advantage more on his side than your own.

Thus Diodorus went off in a trice to seek Hermogenes, and at no great
outlay won to himself a friend--a friend whose one concern it now was to
discover how, by word or deed, he might help and gladden Diodorus.




