BOOK III


I

Aspirants to honour and distinction (1) derived similar help from
Socrates, who in each case stimulated in them a persevering assiduity
towards their several aims, as the following narratives tend to show. He
had heard on one occasion of the arrival in Athens of Dionysodorus, (2)
who professed to teach the whole duty of a general. (3) Accordingly he
remarked to one of those who were with him--a young man whose anxiety to
obtain the office of Strategos (4) was no secret to him:

 (1) {ton kalon} = everything which the {kalos te kagathos} should aim
    at, but especially the honourable offices of state such as the
    Archonship, Strategia, Hipparchia, etc. See Plat. "Laches."

 (2) Dionysodorus of Chios, presumably. See Plat. "Euthyd." 271 C foll.

 (3) A professor of the science and art of strategy.

 (4) Lit. "that honour," sc. the Strategia.

Soc. It would be monstrous on the part of any one who sought to become
a general (5) to throw away the slightest opportunity of learning the
duties of the office. Such a person, I should say, would deserve to be
fined and punished by the state far more than the charlatan who without
having learnt the art of a sculptor undertakes a contract to carve a
statue. Considering that the whole fortunes of the state are entrusted
to the general during a war, with all its incidental peril, it is only
reasonable to anticipate that great blessings or great misfortunes
will result in proportion to the success or bungling of that officer. I
appeal to you, young sir, do you not agree that a candidate who, while
taking pains to be elected neglects to learn the duties of the office,
would richly deserve to be fined?

 (5) i.e. "head of the war department, and commander-in-chief," etc.

With arguments like these he persuaded the young man to go and take
lessons. After he had gone through the course he came back, and Socrates
proceeded playfully to banter him.

Soc. Behold our young friend, sirs, as Homer says of Agamemnon, of mein
majestical, (6) so he; does he not seem to move more majestically, like
one who has studied to be a general? Of course, just as a man who
has learned to play the harp is a harper, even if he never touch the
instrument, or as one who has studied medicine is a physician, though he
does not practise, so our friend here from this time forward is now and
ever shall be a general, even though he does not receive a vote at the
elections. But the dunce who has not the science is neither general
nor doctor, no, not even if the whole world appointed him. But (he
proceeded, turning to the youth), in case any of us should ever find
ourselves captain or colonel (7) under you, to give us some smattering
of the science of war, what did the professor take as the starting-point
of his instruction in generalship? Please inform us.

 (6) "Il." iii. 169, 170.

 (7) Or, "brigadier or captain," lit. taxiarch or lochagos.

Then the young man: He began where he ended; he taught me tactics
(8)--tactics and nothing else.

 (8) Cf. "Cyrop." I. vi. 12 foll.; VIII. v. 15.

Yet surely (replied Socrates) that is only an infinitesimal part of
generalship. A general (9) must be ready in furnishing the material of
war: in providing the commissariat for his troops; quick in devices, he
must be full of practical resource; nothing must escape his eye or tax
his endurance; he must be shrewd, and ready of wit, a combination at
once of clemency and fierceness, of simplicity and of insidious
craft; he must play the part of watchman, of robber; now prodigal as
a spendthrift, and again close-fisted as a miser, the bounty of his
munificence must be equalled by the narrowness of his greed; impregnable
in defence, a very dare-devil in attack--these and many other qualities
must he possess who is to make a good general and minister of war; they
must come to him by gift of nature or through science. No doubt it is a
grand thing also to be a tactician, since there is all the difference in
the world between an army properly handled in the field and the same
in disorder; just as stones and bricks, woodwork and tiles, tumbled
together in a heap are of no use at all, but arrange them in a certain
order--at bottom and atop materials which will not crumble or rot,
such as stones and earthen tiles, and in the middle between the two put
bricks and woodwork, with an eye to architectural principle, (10) and
finally you get a valuable possession--to wit, a dwelling-place.

 (9) A strategos. For the duties and spheres of action of this officer,
    see Gow, op. cit. xiv. 58.

 (10) "As in the building of a house." See Vitrivius, ii. 3; Plin. xxv.
    14.

The simile is very apt, Socrates (11) (replied the youth), for in
battle, too, the rule is to draw up the best men in front and rear,
with those of inferior quality between, where they may be led on by the
former and pushed on by the hinder.

 (11) Cf. "Il." iv. 297 foll.; "Cyrop." VI. iii. 25; Polyb. x. 22.

Soc. Very good, no doubt, if the professor taught you to distinguish
good and bad; but if not, where is the use of your learning? It would
scarcely help you, would it, to be told to arrange coins in piles, the
best coins at top and bottom and the worst in the middle, unless you
were first taught to distinguish real from counterfeit.

The Youth. Well no, upon my word, he did not teach us that, so that the
task of distinguishing between good and bad must devolve on ourselves.

Soc. Well, shall we see, then, how we may best avoid making blunders
between them?

I am ready (replied the youth).

Soc. Well then! Let us suppose we are marauders, and the task imposed
upon us is to carry off some bullion; it will be a right disposition of
our forces if we place in the vanguard those who are the greediest of
gain? (12)

 (12) "Whose fingers itch for gold."

The Youth. I should think so.

Soc. Then what if there is danger to be faced? Shall the vanguard
consist of men who are greediest of honour?

The Youth. It is these, at any rate, who will face danger for the sake
of praise and glory. (13) Fortunately such people are not hid away in
a corner; they shine forth conspicuous everywhere, and are easy to be
discovered.

 (13) Cf. Shakesp. "seeking the bubble reputation even in the cannon's
    mouth."

Soc. But tell me, did he teach you how to draw up troops in general,
or specifically where and how to apply each particular kind of tactical
arrangement?

The Youth. Nothing of the sort.

Soc. And yet there are and must be innumerable circumstances in which
the same ordering of march or battle will be out of place.

The Youth. I assure you he did not draw any of these fine distinctions.

He did not, did not he? (he answered). Bless me! Go back to him again,
then, and ply him with questions; if he really has the science, and is
not lost to all sense of shame, he will blush to have taken your money
and then to have sent you away empty.


II

At another time he fell in with a man who had been chosen general and
minister of war, and thus accosted him.

Soc. Why did Homer, think you, designate Agamemnon "shepherd of the
peoples"? (1) Was it possibly to show that, even as a shepherd must care
for his sheep and see that they are safe and have all things needful,
and that the objects of their rearing be secured, so also must a general
take care that his soldiers are safe and have their supplies, and attain
the objects of their soldiering? Which last is that they may get the
mastery of their enemies, and so add to their own good fortune and
happiness; or tell me, what made him praise Agamemnon, saying--

    He is both a good king and a warrior bold? (2)

Did he mean, perhaps, to imply that he would be a 'warrior bold,' not
merely in standing alone and bravely battling against the foe, but as
inspiring the whole of his host with like prowess; and by a 'good king,'
not merely one who should stand forth gallantly to protect his own life,
but who should be the source of happiness to all over whom he reigns?
Since a man is not chosen king in order to take heed to himself, albeit
nobly, but that those who chose him may attain to happiness through him.
And why do men go soldiering except to ameliorate existence? (3) and to
this end they choose their generals that they may find in them guides to
the goal in question. He, then, who undertakes that office is bound to
procure for those who choose him the thing they seek for. And indeed it
were not easy to find any nobler ambition than this, or aught ignobler
than its opposite.

 (1) "Il." ii. 243. "The People's Paster," Chapman.

 (2) "Il." iii. 179; cf. "Symp." iv. 6. A favourite line of Alexander
    the Great's, it is said.

 (3) Of, "that life may reach some flower of happiness."

After such sort he handled the question, what is the virtue of a good
leader? and by shredding off all superficial qualities, laid bare as
the kernel of the matter that it is the function of every leader to make
those happy whom he may be called upon to lead. (4)

 (4) Cf. Plat. "Rep." 342.


III

The following conversation with a youth who had just been elected
hipparch (1) (or commandant of cavalry), I can also vouch for. (2)

 (1) Cf. "Hipparch."

 (2) Lit. "I know he once held."

Soc. Can you tell us what set you wishing to be a general of cavalry,
young sir? What was your object? I suppose it was not simply to ride at
the head of the "knights," an honour not denied to the mounted archers,
(3) who ride even in front of the generals themselves?

 (3) Lit. "Hippotoxotai." See Boeckh, "P. E. A." II. xxi. p. 264 (Eng.
    tr.)

Hipp. You are right.

Soc. No more was it for the sake merely of public notoriety, since a
madman might boast of that fatal distinction. (4)

 (4) Or, "as we all know, 'Tom Fool' can boast," etc.

Hipp. You are right again.

Soc. Is this possibly the explanation? you think to improve the
cavalry--your aim would be to hand it over to the state in better
condition than you find it; and, if the cavalry chanced to be called
out, you at their head would be the cause of some good thing to Athens?

Hipp. Most certainly.

Soc. Well, and a noble ambition too, upon my word--if you can achieve
your object. The command to which you are appointed concerns horses and
riders, does it not?

Hipp. It does, no doubt.

Soc. Come then, will you explain to us first how you propose to improve
the horses.

Hipp. Ah, that will scarcely form part of my business, I fancy. Each
trooper is personally responsible for the condition of his horse.

Soc. But suppose, when they present themselves and their horses, (5) you
find that some have brought beasts with bad feet or legs or otherwise
infirm, and others such ill-fed jades that they cannot keep up on the
march; others, again, brutes so ill broken and unmanageable that they
will not keep their place in the ranks, and others such desperate
plungers that they cannot be got to any place in the ranks at all. What
becomes of your cavalry force then? How will you charge at the head of
such a troop, and win glory for the state?

 (5) For this phrase, see Schneider and Kuhner ad loc.

Hipp. You are right. I will try to look after the horses to my utmost.

Soc. Well, and will you not lay your hand to improve the men themselves?

Hipp. I will.

Soc. The first thing will be to make them expert in mounting their
chargers?

Hipp. That certainly, for if any of them were dismounted he would then
have a better chance of saving himself.

Soc. Well, but when it comes to the hazard of engagement, what will
you do then? Give orders to draw the enemy down to the sandy ground (6)
where you are accustomed to manouvre, or endeavour beforehand to put
your men through their practice on ground resembling a real battlefield?

 (6) e.g. the hippodrome at Phaleron.

Hipp. That would be better, no doubt.

Soc. Well, shall you regard it as a part of your duty to see that as
many of your men as possible can take aim and shoot on horseback? (7)

 (7) Cf. "Hipparch," i. 21.

Hipp. It will be better, certainly.

Soc. And have you thought how to whet the courage of your troopers? to
kindle in them rage to meet the enemy?--which things are but stimulants
to make stout hearts stouter?

Hipp. If I have not done so hitherto, I will try to make up for lost
time now.

Soc. And have you troubled your head at all to consider how you are to
secure the obedience of your men? for without that not one particle
of good will you get, for all your horses and troopers so brave and so
stout.

Hipp. That is a true saying; but how, Socrates, should a man best bring
them to this virtue? (8)

 (8) {protrepsasthai}. See above, I. ii. 64; below, IV. v. 1.

Soc. I presume you know that in any business whatever, people are more
apt to follow the lead of those whom they look upon as adepts; thus in
case of sickness they are readiest to obey him whom they regard as
the cleverest physician; and so on a voyage the most skilful pilot; in
matters agricultural the best farmer, and so forth.

Hipp. Yes, certainly.

Soc. Then in this matter of cavalry also we may reasonably suppose that
he who is looked upon as knowing his business best will command the
readiest obedience.

Hipp. If, then, I can prove to my troopers that I am better than all of
them, will that suffice to win their obedience?

Soc. Yes, if along with that you can teach them that obedience to you
brings greater glory and surer safety to themselves.

Hipp. How am I to teach them that?

Soc. Upon my word! How are you to teach them that? Far more easily, I
take it, than if you had to teach them that bad things are better than
good, and more advantageous to boot.

Hipp. I suppose you mean that, besides his other qualifications a
commandant of cavalry must have command of speech and argument? (9)

 (9) Or, "practise the art of oratory"; "express himself clearly and
    rationally." See Grote, "H. G." VIII. lxvii. p. 463 note;
    "Hipparch," i. 24; viii. 22.

Soc. Were you under the impression that the commandant was not to open
his mouth? Did it never occur to you that all the noblest things
which custom (10) compels us to learn, and to which indeed we owe our
knowledge of life, have all been learned by means of speech (11) and
reason; and if there be any other noble learning which a man may learn,
it is this same reason whereby he learns it; and the best teachers are
those who have the freest command of thought and language, and those
that have the best knowledge of the most serious things are the most
brilliant masters of disputation. Again, have you not observed that
whenever this city of ours fits out one of her choruses--such as that,
for instance, which is sent to Delos (12)--there is nothing elsewhere
from any quarter of the world which can compete with it; nor will you
find in any other state collected so fair a flower of manhood as in
Athens? (13)

 (10) Cf Arist. "Rhet." ii. 12, {oi neoi pepaideuntai upo tou nomou
    monon}.

 (11) {dia logou}.

 (12) See Thuc. iii. 104; and below, IV. viii. 2.

 (13) See references ap. Schneider and Kuhner; "Symp." iv. 17.

Hipp. You say truly.

Soc. But for all that, it is not in sweetness of voice that the
Athenians differ from the rest of the world so much, nor in stature of
body or strength of limb, but in ambition and that love of honour (14)
which most of all gives a keen edge to the spirit in the pursuit of
things lovely and of high esteem.

 (14) See below, v. 3; Dem. "de Cor." 28 foll.

Hipp. That, too, is a true saying.

Soc. Do you not think, then, that if a man devoted himself to our
cavalry also, here in Athens, we should far outstrip the rest of the
world, whether in the furnishing of arms and horses, or in orderliness
of battle-array, or in eager hazardous encounter with the foe, if only
we could persuade ourselves that by so doing we should obtain honour and
distinction?

Hipp. It is reasonable to think so.

Soc. Have no hesitation, therefore, but try to guide your men into this
path, (15) whence you yourself, and through you your fellow-citizens,
will reap advantage.

 (15) Or, "to conduct which will not certainly fail of profit to
    yourself or through you to..."

Yes, in good sooth, I will try (he answered).


IV

At another time, seeing Nicomachides on his way back from the
elections (of magistrates), (1) he asked him: Who are elected generals,
Nicomachides?

 (1) Cf. "Pol. Ath." i. 3; Aristot. "Ath. Pol." 44. 4; and Dr. Sandys'
    note ad loc. p. 165 of his edition.

And he: Is it not just like them, these citizens of Athens--just like
them, I say--to go and elect, not me, who ever since my name first
appeared on the muster-roll have literally worn myself out with military
service--now as a captain, now as a colonel--and have received all these
wounds from the enemy, look you! (at the same time, and suiting the
action to the word, he bared his arms and proceeded to show the scars
of ancient wounds)--they elect not me (he went on), but, if you please,
Antisthenes! who never served as a hoplite (2) in his life nor in the
cavalry ever made a brilliant stroke, that I ever heard tell of; no! in
fact, he has got no science at all, I take it, except to amass stores of
wealth.

 (2) Cf. Lys. xiv. 10.

But still (returned Socrates), surely that is one point in his
favour--he ought to be able to provide the troops with supplies.

Nic. Well, for the matter of that, merchants are good hands at
collecting stores; but it does not follow that a merchant or trader will
be able to command an army.

But (rejoined Socrates) Antisthenes is a man of great pertinacity, who
insists on winning, and that is a very necessary quality in a general.
(3) Do not you see how each time he has been choragos (4) he has been
successful with one chorus after another?

 (3) See Grote, "Plato," i. 465 foll.

 (4) Choir-master, or Director of the Chorus. It was his duty to
    provide and preside over a chorus to sing, dance, or play at any
    of the public festivals, defraying the cost as a state service of
    {leitourgia}. See "Pol. Ath." iii. 4; "Hiero," ix. 4; Aristot.
    "Pol. Ath." 28. 3.

Nic. Bless me! yes; but there is a wide difference between standing at
the head of a band of singers and dancers and a troop of soldiers.

Soc. Still, without any practical skill in singing or in the training
of a chorus, Antisthenes somehow had the art to select the greatest
proficients in both.

Nic. Yes, and by the same reasoning we are to infer that on a campaign
he will find proficients, some to marshal the troops for him and others
to fight his battles?

Soc. Just so. If in matters military he only exhibits the same skill in
selecting the best hands as he has shown in matters of the chorus, it is
highly probable he will here also bear away the palm of victory; and we
may presume that if he expended so much to win a choric victory with a
single tribe, (5) he will be ready to expend more to secure a victory in
war with the whole state to back him.

 (5) See Dem. "against Lept." 496. 26. Each tribe nominated such of its
    members as were qualified to undertake the burden.

Nic. Do you really mean, Socrates, that it is the function of the same
man to provide efficient choruses and to act as commander-in-chief?

Soc. I mean this, that, given a man knows what he needs to provide,
and has the skill to do so, no matter what the department of things may
be--house or city or army--you will find him a good chief and director
(6) of the same.

 (6) Or, "representative."

Then Nicomachides: Upon my word, Socrates, I should never have expected
to hear you say that a good housekeeper (7) and steward of an estate
would make a good general.

 (7) Or, "economist"; cf. "Cyrop." I. vi. 12.

Soc. Come then, suppose we examine their respective duties, and so
determine (8) whether they are the same or different.

 (8) Lit. "get to know."

Nic. Let us do so.

Soc. Well then, is it not a common duty of both to procure the ready
obedience of those under them to their orders?

Nic. Certainly.

Soc. And also to assign to those best qualified to perform them their
distinctive tasks?

That, too, belongs to both alike (he answered).

Soc. Again, to chastise the bad and reward the good belongs to both
alike, methinks?

Nic. Decidedly.

Soc. And to win the kindly feeling of their subordinates must surely be
the noble ambition of both?

That too (he answered).

Soc. And do you consider it to the interest of both alike to win the
adherence of supporters and allies? (9)

 (9) In reference to the necessity of building up a family connection
    or political alliances cf. Arist. "Pol." iii. 9, 13.

Nic. Without a doubt.

Soc. And does it not closely concern them both to be good guardians of
their respective charges?

Nic. Very much so.

Soc. Then it equally concerns them both to be painstaking and prodigal
of toil in all their doings?

Nic. Yes, all these duties belong to both alike, but the parallel ends
when you come to actual fighting.

Soc. Yet they are both sure to meet with enemies?

Nic. There is no doubt about that.

Soc. Then is it not to the interest of both to get the upper hand of
these?

Nic. Certainly; but you omit to tell us what service organisation and
the art of management will render when it comes to actual fighting.

Soc. Why, it is just then, I presume, it will be of most service, for
the good economist knows that nothing is so advantageous or so lucrative
as victory in battle, or to put it negatively, nothing so disastrous
and expensive as defeat. He will enthusiastically seek out and provide
everything conducive to victory, he will painstakingly discover and
guard against all that tends to defeat, and when satisfied that all is
ready and ripe for victory he will deliver battle energetically, and
what is equally important, until the hour of final preparation has
arrived, (10) he will be cautious to deliver battle. Do not despise men
of economic genius, Nicomachides; the difference between the devotion
requisite to private affairs and to affairs of state is merely one of
quantity. For the rest the parallel holds strictly, and in this respect
pre-eminently, that both are concerned with human instruments: which
human beings, moreover, are of one type and temperament, whether we
speak of devotion to public affairs or of the administration of private
property. To fare well in either case is given to those who know the
secret of dealing with humanity, whereas the absence of that knowledge
will as certainly imply in either case a fatal note of discord. (11)

 (10) Lit. "as long as he is unprepared."

 (11) L. Dindorf, "Index Graec." Ox. ed.; cf. Hor. "Ep." II. ii. 144,
    "sed verae numerosque modosque ediscere vitae," "the harmony of
    life," Conington.


V

A conversation held with Pericles the son of the great statesman may
here be introduced. (1) Socrates began:

 (1) Or, "On one occasion Pericles was the person addressed in
    conversation." For Pericles see "Hell." I. v. 16; vii. 15; Plut.
    "Pericl." 37 (Clough, i. 368).

I am looking forward, I must tell you, Pericles, to a great improvement
in our military affairs when you are minister of war. (2) The prestige
of Athens, I hope, will rise; we shall gain the mastery over our
enemies.

 (2) "Strategos."

Pericles replied: I devoutly wish your words might be fulfilled, but how
this happy result is to be obtained, I am at a loss to discover.

Shall we (Socrates continued), shall we balance the arguments for and
against, and consider to what extent the possibility does exist?

Pray let us do so (he answered).

Soc. Well then, you know that in point of numbers the Athenians are not
inferior to the Boeotians?

Per. Yes, I am aware of that.

Soc. And do you think the Boeotians could furnish a better pick of fine
healthy men than the Athenians?

Per. I think we should very well hold our own in that respect.

Soc. And which of the two would you take to be the more united
people--the friendlier among themselves?

Per. The Athenians, I should say, for so many sections of the Boeotians,
resenting the selfish policy (3) of Thebes, are ill disposed to that
power, but at Athens I see nothing of the sort.

 (3) "The self-aggrandisement."

Soc. But perhaps you will say that there is no people more jealous of
honour or haughtier in spirit. (4) And these feelings are no weak
spurs to quicken even a dull spirit to hazard all for glory's sake and
fatherland.

 (4) Reading {megalophronestatoi}, after Cobet. See "Hipparch," vii. 3;
    or if as vulg. {philophronestatoi}, transl. "more affable."

Per. Nor is there much fault to find with Athenians in these respects.

Soc. And if we turn to consider the fair deeds of ancestry, (5) to
no people besides ourselves belongs so rich a heritage of stimulating
memories, whereby so many of us are stirred to pursue virtue with
devotion and to show ourselves in our turn also men of valour like our
sires.

 (5) See Wesley's anthem, Eccles. xliv. 1, "Let us now praise famous
    men and our fathers that begat us."

Per. All that you say, Socrates, is most true, but do you observe that
ever since the disaster of the thousand under Tolmides at Lebadeia,
coupled with that under Hippocrates at Delium, (6) the prestige of
Athens by comparison with the Boeotians has been lowered, whilst the
spirit of Thebes as against Athens had been correspondingly exalted, so
that those Boeotians who in old days did not venture to give battle
to the Athenians even in their own territory unless they had the
Lacedaemonians and the rest of the Peloponnesians to help them, do
nowadays threaten to make an incursion into Attica single-handed; and
the Athenians, who formerly, if they had to deal with the Boeotians (7)
only, made havoc of their territory, are now afraid the Boeotians may
some day harry Attica.

 (6) Lebadeia, 447 B.C.; Delium, 424 B.C. For Tolmides and Hippocrates
    see Thuc. i. 113; iv. 100 foll.; Grote, "H. G." v. 471; vi. 533.

 (7) Reading {ote B. monoi}, al. {ou monoi}, "when the Boeotians were
    not unaided."

To which Socrates: Yes, I perceive that this is so, but it seems to me
that the state was never more tractably disposed, never so ripe for
a really good leader, as to-day. For if boldness be the parent of
carelessness, laxity, and insubordination, it is the part of fear to
make people more disposed to application, obedience, and good order.
A proof of which you may discover in the behaviour of people on
ship-board. It is in seasons of calm weather when there is nothing
to fear that disorder may be said to reign, but as soon as there is
apprehension of a storm, or an enemy in sight, the scene changes; not
only is each word of command obeyed, but there is a hush of silent
expectation; the mariners wait to catch the next signal like an
orchestra with eyes upon the leader.

Per. But indeed, given that now is the opportunity to take obedience
at the flood, it is high time also to explain by what means we are
to rekindle in the hearts of our countrymen (8) the old fires--the
passionate longing for antique valour, for the glory and the wellbeing
of the days of old.

 (8) Reading {anerasthenai}, Schneider's emendation of the vulg.
    {aneristhenai}.

Well (proceeded Socrates), supposing we wished them to lay claim
to certain material wealth now held by others, we could not better
stimulate them to lay hands on the objects coveted than by showing them
that these were ancestral possessions (9) to which they had a natural
right. But since our object is that they should set their hearts on
virtuous pre-eminence, we must prove to them that such headship combined
with virtue is an old time-honoured heritage which pertains to them
beyond all others, and that if they strive earnestly after it they will
soon out-top the world.

 (9) Cf. Solon in the matter of Salamis, Plut. "Sol." 8; Bergk. "Poet.
    Lyr. Gr. Solon," SALAMIS, i. 2, 3.

Por. How are we to inculcate this lesson?

Soc. I think by reminding them of a fact already registered in their
minds, (10) that the oldest of our ancestors whose names are known to us
were also the bravest of heroes.

 (10) Or, "to which their ears are already opened."

Per. I suppose you refer to that judgment of the gods which, for their
virtue's sake, Cecrops and his followers were called on to decide? (11)

 (11) See Apollodorus, iii. 14.

Soc. Yes, I refer to that and to the birth and rearing of Erectheus,
(12) and also to the war (13) which in his days was waged to stay the
tide of invasion from the whole adjoining continent; and that other war
in the days of the Heraclidae (14) against the men of Peloponnese; and
that series of battles fought in the days of Theseus (15)--in all which
the virtuous pre-eminence of our ancestry above the men of their own
times was made manifest. Or, if you please, we may come down to things
of a later date, which their descendants and the heroes of days not so
long anterior to our own wrought in the struggle with the lords of Asia,
(16) nay of Europe also, as far as Macedonia: a people possessing a
power and means of attack far exceeding any who had gone before--who,
moreover, had accomplished the doughtiest deeds. These things the men of
Athens wrought partly single-handed, (17) and partly as sharers with
the Peloponnesians in laurels won by land and sea. Heroes were these men
also, far outshining, as tradition tells us, the peoples of their time.

 (12) Cf. "Il." ii. 547, {'Erekhtheos megaletoros k.t.l.}

 (13) Cf. Isoc. "Paneg." 19, who handles all the topics.

 (14) Commonly spoken of as "the Return." See Grote, "H. G." II. ch.
    xviii.

 (15) Against the Amazons and Thracians; cf. Herod. ix. 27; Plut.
    "Thes." 27.

 (16) The "Persian" wars; cf. Thucyd. I. i.

 (17) He omits the Plataeans.

Per. Yes, so runs the story of their heroism.

Soc. Therefore it is that, amidst the many changes of inhabitants, and
the migrations which have, wave after wave, swept over Hellas, these
maintained themselves in their own land, unmoved; so that it was a
common thing for others to turn to them as to a court of appeal on
points of right, or to flee to Athens as a harbour of refuge from the
hand of the oppressor. (18)

 (18) Cf. (Plat.) "Menex."; Isocr. "Paneg."

Then Pericles: And the wonder to me, Socrates, is how our city ever came
to decline.

Soc. I think we are victims of our own success. Like some athlete, (19)
whose facile preponderance in the arena has betrayed him into laxity
until he eventually succumbs to punier antagonists, so we Athenians,
in the plenitude of our superiority, have neglected ourselves and are
become degenerate.

 (19) Reading {athletai tines}, or if {alloi tines}, translate "any one
    else."

Per. What then ought we to do now to recover our former virtue?

Soc. There need be no mystery about that, I think. We can rediscover the
institutions of our forefathers--applying them to the regulation of our
lives with something of their precision, and not improbably with like
success; or we can imitate those who stand at the front of affairs
to-day, (20) adapting to ourselves their rule of life, in which case, if
we live up to the standard of our models, we may hope at least to rival
their excellence, or, by a more conscientious adherence to what they aim
at, rise superior.

 (20) Sc. the Lacedaemonians. See W. L. Newman, op. cit. i. 396.

You would seem to suggest (he answered) that the spirit of beautiful and
brave manhood has taken wings and left our city; (21) as, for instance,
when will Athenians, like the Lacedaemonians, reverence old age--the
Athenian, who takes his own father as a starting-point for the contempt
he pours upon grey hairs? When will he pay as strict an attention to the
body, who is not content with neglecting a good habit, (22) but laughs
to scorn those who are careful in this matter? When shall we Athenians
so obey our magistrates--we who take a pride, as it were, in despising
authority? When, once more, shall we be united as a people--we who,
instead of combining to promote common interests, delight in blackening
each other's characters, (23) envying one another more than we envy all
the world besides; and--which is our worst failing--who, in private and
public intercourse alike, are torn by dissension and are caught in a
maze of litigation, and prefer to make capital out of our neighbour's
difficulties rather than to render natural assistance? To make our
conduct consistent, indeed, we treat our national interests no better
than if they were the concerns of some foreign state; we make them bones
of contention to wrangle over, and rejoice in nothing so much as in
possessing means and ability to indulge these tastes. From this hotbed
is engendered in the state a spirit of blind folly (24) and cowardice,
and in the hearts of the citizens spreads a tangle of hatred and mutual
hostility which, as I often shudder to think, will some day cause some
disaster to befall the state greater than it can bear. (25)

 (21) Or, "is far enough away from Athens."

 (22) See below, III. xii. 5; "Pol. Ath." i. 13; "Rev." iv. 52.

 (23) Or, "to deal despitefully with one another."

 (24) Reading {ateria}. See L. Dindorf ad loc., Ox. ed. lxii. Al.
    {apeiria}, a want of skill, or {ataxia}, disorderliness. Cf. "Pol.
    Ath." i. 5.

 (25) Possibly the author is thinking of the events of 406, 405 B.C.
    (see "Hell." I. vii. and II.), and history may repeat itself.

Do not (replied Socrates), do not, I pray you, permit yourself to
believe that Athenians are smitten with so incurable a depravity. Do you
not observe their discipline in all naval matters? Look at their prompt
and orderly obedience to the superintendents at the gymnastic contests,
(26) their quite unrivalled subservience to their teachers in the
training of our choruses.

 (26) Epistatoi, i.e. stewards and training-masters.

Yes (he answered), there's the wonder of it; to think that all those
good people should so obey their leaders, but that our hoplites and our
cavalry, who may be supposed to rank before the rest of the citizens
in excellence of manhood, (27) should be so entirely unamenable to
discipline.

 (27) {kalokagathia}.

Then Socrates: Well, but the council which sits on Areopagos is composed
of citizens of approved (28) character, is it not?

 (28) Technically, they must have passed the {dokimasia}. And for the
    "Aeropagos" see Grote, "H. G." v. 498; Aristot. "Pol." ii. 12;
    "Ath. Pol." 4. 4, where see Dr. Sandys' note, p. 18.

Certainly (he answered).

Soc. Then can you name any similar body, judicial or executive, trying
cases or transacting other business with greater honour, stricter
legality, higher dignity, or more impartial justice?

No, I have no fault to find on that score (he answered).

Soc. Then we ought not to despair as though all sense of orderliness and
good discipline had died out of our countrymen.

Still (he answered), if it is not to harp upon one string, I maintain
that in military service, where, if anywhere, sobreity and temperance,
orderliness and good discipline are needed, none of these essentials
receives any attention.

May it not perhaps be (asked Socrates) that in this department they are
officered by those who have the least knowledge? (29) Do you not notice,
to take the case of harp-players, choric performers, dancers, and the
like, that no one would ever dream of leading if he lacked the requisite
knowledge? and the same holds of wrestlers or pancratiasts.

 (29) {episteme}. See below, III. ix. 10.

Moreover, while in these cases any one in command can tell you where he
got the elementary knowledge of what he presides over, most generals are
amateurs and improvisers. (30) I do not at all suppose that you are
one of that sort. I believe you could give as clear an account of your
schooling in strategy as you could in the matter of wrestling. No
doubt you have got at first hand many of your father's "rules for
generalship," which you carefully preserve, besides having collected
many others from every quarter whence it was possible to pick up any
knowledge which would be of use to a future general. Again, I feel
sure you are deeply concerned to escape even unconscious ignorance of
anything which will be serviceable to you in so high an office; and
if you detect in yourself any ignorance, you turn to those who have
knowledge in these matters (sparing neither gifts nor gratitude) to
supplement your ignorance by their knowledge and to secure their help.

 (30) Cf. "Pol. Lac." xiii. 5.

To which Pericles: I am not so blind, Socrates, as to imagine you say
these words under the idea that I am truly so careful in these matters;
but rather your object is to teach me that the would-be general must
make such things his care. I admit in any case all you say.

Socrates proceeded: Has it ever caught your observation, Pericles, that
a high mountain barrier stretches like a bulwark in front of our country
down towards Boeotia--cleft, moreover, by narrow and precipitous passes,
the only avenues into the heart of Attica, which lies engirdled by a
ring of natural fortresses? (31)

 (31) The mountains are Cithaeron and Parnes N., and Cerata N.W.

Per. Certainly I have.

Soc. Well, and have you ever heard tell of the Mysians and Pisidians
living within the territory of the great king, (32) who, inside their
mountain fortresses, lightly armed, are able to rush down and inflict
much injury on the king's territory by their raids, while preserving
their own freedom?

 (32) For this illustration see "Anab." III. ii. 23; cf. "Econ." iv.
    18, where Socrates ({XS}) refers to Cyrus's expedition and death.

Per. Yes, the circumstance is not new to me.

And do you not think (added Socrates) that a corps of young able-bodied
Athenians, accoutred with lighter arms, (33) and holding our natural
mountain rampart in possession, would prove at once a thorn in the
enemy's side offensively, whilst defensively they would form a splendid
bulwark to protect the country?

 (33) Cf. the reforms of Iphicrates.

To which Pericles: I think, Socrates, these would be all useful
measures, decidedly.

If, then (replied Socrates), these suggestions meet your approbation,
try, O best of men, to realise them--if you can carry out a portion
of them, it will be an honour to yourself and a blessing to the state;
while, if you fail in any point, there will be no damage done to the
city nor discredit to yourself.


VI

Glaucon, (1) the son of Ariston, had conceived such an ardour to gain
the headship of the state that nothing could hinder him but he must
deliver a course of public speeches, (2) though he had not yet reached
the age of twenty. His friends and relatives tried in vain to stop him
making himself ridiculous and being dragged down from the bema. (3)
Socrates, who took a kindly interest in the youth for the sake of
Charmides (4) the son of Glaucon, and of Plato, alone succeeded in
restraining him. It happened thus. He fell in with him, and first of
all, to get him to listen, detained him by some such remarks as the
following: (5)

 (1) Glaucon, Plato's brother. Grote, "Plato," i. 508.

 (2) "Harangue the People."

 (3) See Plat. "Protag." 319 C: "And if some person offers to give them
    advice who is not supposed by them to have any skill in the art
     (sc. of politics), even though he be good-looking, and rich, and
    noble, they will not listen to him, but laugh at him, and hoot
    him, until he is either clamoured down and retires of himself; or
    if he persists, he is dragged away or put out by the constables at
    the command of the prytanes" (Jowett). Cf. Aristoph. "Knights,"
    665, {kath eilkon auton oi prutaneis kai toxotai}.

 (4) For Charmides (maternal uncle of Plato and Glaucon, cousin of
    Critias) see ch. vii. below; Plato the philosopher, Glaucon's
    brother, see Cobet, "Pros. Xen." p. 28.

 (5) Or, "and in the first instance addressing him in such terms he
    could not choose but hear, detained him." See above, II. vi. 11.
    Socrates applies his own theory.

Ah, Glaucon (he exclaimed), so you have determined to become prime
minister? (6)

 (6) {prostateuein}.

Glauc. Yes, Socrates, I have.

Soc. And what a noble aim! if aught human ever deserved to be called
noble; since if you succeed in your design, it follows, as the night the
day, you will be able not only to gratify your every wish, but you
will be in a position to benefit your friends, you will raise up your
father's house, you will exalt your fatherland, you will become a name
thrice famous in the city first, and next in Hellas, and lastly even
among barbarians perhaps, like Themistocles; but be it here or be it
there, wherever you be, you will be the observed of all beholders. (7)

 (7) "The centre of attraction--the cynosure of neighbouring eyes."

The heart of Glaucon swelled with pride as he drank in the words, and
gladly he stayed to listen.

Presently Socrates proceeded: Then this is clear, Glaucon, is it not?
that you must needs benefit the city, since you desire to reap her
honours?

Glauc. Undoubtedly.

Then, by all that is sacred (Socrates continued), do not keep us in the
dark, but tell us in what way do you propose first to benefit the state?
what is your starting-point? (8) When Glaucon remained with sealed lips,
as if he were now for the first time debating what this starting-point
should be, Socrates continued: I presume, if you wished to improve a
friend's estate, you would endeavour to do so by adding to its wealth,
would you not? So here, maybe, you will try to add to the wealth of the
state?

 (8) Or, "tell us what your starting-point will be in the path of
    benefaction."

Most decidedly (he answered).

Soc. And we may take it the state will grow wealthier in proportion as
her revenues increase?

Glauc. That seems probable, at any rate.

Soc. Then would you kindly tell us from what sources the revenues of the
state are at present derived, and what is their present magnitude? No
doubt you have gone carefully into the question, so that if any of these
are failing you may make up the deficit, or if neglected for any reason,
make some new provision. (9)

 (9) Or, "or if others have dropped out or been negligently overlooked,
    you may replace them."

Glauc. Nay, to speak the truth, these are matters I have not thoroughly
gone into.

Never mind (he said) if you have omitted the point; but you might oblige
us by running through the items or heads of expenditure. Obviously you
propose to remove all those which are superfluous?

Glauc. Well, no. Upon my word I have not had time to look into that side
of the matter either as yet.

Soc. Then we will postpone for the present the problem of making
the state wealthier; obviously without knowing the outgoings and the
incomings it would be impossible to deal with the matter seriously.

But, Socrates (Glaucon remarked), it is possible to enrich the state out
of the pockets of her enemies!

Yes, to be sure, considerably (answered Socrates), in the event of
getting the better of them; but in the event of being worsted, it is
also possible to lose what we have got.

A true observation (he replied).

And therefore (proceeded Socrates), before he makes up his mind with
what enemy to go to war, a statesman should know the relative powers of
his own city and the adversary's, so that, in case the superiority be
on his own side, he may throw the weight of his advice into the scale
of undertaking war; but if the opposite he may plead in favour of
exercising caution.

You are right (he answered).

Soc. Then would you for our benefit enumerate the land and naval forces
first of Athens and then of our opponents?

Glauc. Pardon me. I could not tell you them off-hand at a moment's
notice.

Or (added Socrates), if you have got the figures on paper, you might
produce them. I cannot tell how anxious I am to hear your statement.

Glauc. No, I assure you, I have not got them even on paper yet.

Soc. Well then, we will defer tending advice on the topic of peace or
war, in a maiden speech at any rate. (10) I can understand that, owing
to the magnitude of the questions, in these early days of your ministry
you have not yet fully examined them. But come, I am sure that you have
studied the defences of the country, at all events, and you know exactly
how many forts and outposts are serviceable (11) and how many are not;
you can tell us which garrisons are strong enough and which defective;
and you are prepared to throw in the weight of your advice in favour
of increasing the serviceable outposts and sweeping away those that are
superfluous?

 (10) See "Econ." xi. 1.

 (11) Or, "advantageously situated." See the author's own tract on
    "Revenues."

Glauc. Yes, sweep them all away, that's my advice; for any good that is
likely to come of them! Defences indeed! so maintained that the property
of the rural districts is simply pilfered.

But suppose you sweep away the outposts (he asked), may not something
worse, think you, be the consequence? will not sheer plundering be free
to any ruffian who likes?... But may I ask is this judgment the
result of personal inspection? have you gone yourself and examined the
defences? or how do you know that they are all maintained as you say?

Glauc. I conjecture that it is so.

Soc. Well then, until we have got beyond the region of conjecture shall
we defer giving advice on the matter? (It will be time enough when we
know the facts.)

Possibly it would be better to wait till then (replied Glaucon).

Soc. Then there are the mines, (12) but, of course, I am aware that you
have not visited them in person, so as to be able to say why they are
less productive than formerly.

 (12) Again the author's tract on "Revenues" is a comment on the
    matter.

Well, no; I have never been there myself (he answered).

Soc. No, Heaven help us! an unhealthy district by all accounts; so
that, when the moment for advice on that topic arrives, you will have an
excuse ready to hand.

I see you are making fun of me (Glaucon answered).

Soc. Well, but here is a point, I am sure, which you have not neglected.
No, you will have thoroughly gone into it, and you can tell us. For how
long a time could the corn supplies from the country districts support
the city? how much is requisite for a single year, so that the city may
not run short of this prime necessary, before you are well aware; but on
the contrary you with your full knowledge will be in a position to give
advice on so vital a question, to the aid or may be the salvation of
your country?

It is a colossal business this (Glaucon answered), if I am to be obliged
to give attention to all these details.

Soc. On the other hand, a man could not even manage his own house or his
estate well, without, in the first place, knowing what he requires, and,
in the second place, taking pains, item by item, to supply his wants.
But since this city consists of more than ten thousand houses, and it is
not easy to pay minute attention to so many all at once, how is it you
did not practise yourself by trying to augment the resources of one at
any rate of these--I mean your own uncle's? The service would not be
thrown away. Then if your strength suffices in the single case you might
take in hand a larger number; but if you fail to relieve one, how could
you possibly hope to succeed with many? How absurd for a man, if he
cannot carry half a hundredweight, to attempt to carry a whole! (13)

 (13) Lit. "a single talent's weight... to carry two."

Glauc. Nay, for my part, I am willing enough to assist my uncle's house,
if my uncle would only be persuaded to listen to my advice.

Soc. Then, when you cannot persuade your uncle, do you imagine you will
be able to make the whole Athenian people, uncle and all, obey you?
Be careful, Glaucon (he added), lest in your thirst for glory and high
repute you come to the opposite. Do you not see how dangerous it is for
a man to speak or act beyond the range (14) of his knowledge? To take
the cases known to you of people whose conversation or conduct clearly
transcends these limits: should you say they gain more praise or more
blame on that account? Are they admired the rather or despised? Or,
again, consider those who do know what they say and what they do; and
you will find, I venture to say, that in every sort of undertaking those
who enjoy repute and admiration belong to the class of those endowed
with the highest knowledge; whilst conversely the people of sinister
reputation, the mean and the contemptible, emanate from some depth of
ignorance and dulness. If therefore what you thirst for is repute and
admiration as a statesman, try to make sure of one accomplishment: in
other words, the knowledge as far as in you lies of what you wish to do.
(15) If, indeed, with this to distinguish you from the rest of the
world you venture to concern yourself with state affairs, it would not
surprise me but that you might reach the goal of your ambition easily.

 (14) Or, "to talk of things which he does not know, or to meddle with
    them."

 (15) Or, "try as far as possible to achieve one thing, and that is to
    know the business which you propose to carry out."


VII

Now Charmides, (1) the son of Glaucon, was, as Socrates observed, a man
of mark and influence: a much more powerful person in fact than the mass
of those devoted to politics at that date, but at the same time he was
a man who shrank from approaching the people or busying himself with the
concerns of the state. Accordingly Socrates addressed him thus:

 (1) See last chapter for his relationship to Glaucon (the younger) and
    Plato; for a conception of his character, Plato's dialogue
    "Charmides"; "Theag." 128 E; "Hell." II. iv. 19; "Symp." iv. 31;
    Grote, "Plato," i. 480.

Tell me, Charmides, supposing some one competent to win a victory in the
arena and to receive a crown, (2) whereby he will gain honour himself
and make the land of his fathers more glorious in Hellas, (3) were to
refuse to enter the lists--what kind of person should you set him down
to be?

 (2) In some conquest (e.g. of the Olympic games) where the prize is a
    mere wreath.

 (3) Cf. Pindar passim.

Clearly an effeminate and cowardly fellow (he answered).

Soc. And what if another man, who had it in him, by devotion to affairs
of state, to exalt his city and win honour himself thereby, were to
shrink and hesitate and hang back--would he too not reasonably be
regarded as a coward?

Possibly (he answered); but why do you address these questions to me?

Because (replied Socrates) I think that you, who have this power, do
hesitate to devote yourself to matters which, as being a citizen, if for
no other reason, you are bound to take part in. (4)

 (4) Or add, "and cannot escape from."

Charm. And wherein have you detected in me this power, that you pass so
severe a sentence upon me?

Soc. I have detected it plainly enough in those gatherings (5) in which
you meet the politicians of the day, when, as I observe, each time they
consult you on any point you have always good advice to offer, and when
they make a blunder you lay your finger on the weak point immediately.

 (5) See above, I. v. 4; here possibly of political club conversation.

Charm. To discuss and reason in private is one thing, Socrates, to
battle in the throng of the assembly is another.

Soc. And yet a man who can count, counts every bit as well in a crowd as
when seated alone by himself; and it is the best performer on the harp
in private who carries off the palm of victory in public.

Charm. But do you not see that modesty and timidity are feelings
implanted in man's nature? and these are much more powerfully present to
us in a crowd than within the circle of our intimates.

Soc. Yes, but what I am bent on teaching you is that while you feel no
such bashfulness and timidity before the wisest and strongest of men,
you are ashamed of opening your lips in the midst of weaklings and
dullards. (6) Is it the fullers among them of whom you stand in awe, or
the cobblers, or the carpenters, or the coppersmiths, or the merchants,
or the farmers, or the hucksters of the market-place exchanging their
wares, and bethinking them how they are to buy this thing cheap, and to
sell the other dear--is it before these you are ashamed, for these are
the individual atoms out of which the Public Assembly is composed? (7)
And what is the difference, pray, between your behaviour and that of a
man who, being the superior of trained athletes, quails before a set of
amateurs? Is it not the case that you who can argue so readily with the
foremost statesmen in the city, some of whom affect to look down
upon you--you, with your vast superiority over practised popular
debaters--are no sooner confronted with a set of folk who never in their
lives gave politics a thought, and into whose heads certainly it never
entered to look down upon you--than you are afraid to open your lips in
mortal terror of being laughed at?

 (6) Cf. Cic. "Tusc." v. 36, 104; Plat. "Gorg." 452 E, 454 B.

 (7) Cf. Plat. "Protag." 319 C. See W. L. Newman, op. cit. i. 103.

Well, but you would admit (he answered) that sound argument does
frequently bring down the ridicule of the Popular Assembly.

Soc. Which is equally true of the others. (8) And that is just what
rouses my astonishment, that you who can cope so easily with these
lordly people (when guilty of ridicule) should persuade yourself that
you cannot stand up against a set of commoners. (9) My good fellow, do
not be ignorant of yourself! (10) do not fall into that commonest of
errors--theirs who rush off to investigate the concerns of the rest of
the world, and have no time to turn and examine themselves. Yet that is
a duty which you must not in cowardly sort draw back from: rather must
you brace ourself to give good heed to your own self; and as to public
affairs, if by any manner of means they may be improved through you, do
not neglect them. Success in the sphere of politics means that not only
the mass of your fellow-citizens, but your personal friends and you
yourself last but not least, will profit by your action.

 (8) {oi eteroi}, i.e. "the foremost statesmen" mentioned before. Al.
    "the opposite party," the "Tories," if one may so say, of the
    political clubs.

 (9) Lit. "those... these."

 (10) Ernesti aptly cf. Cic. "ad Quint." iii. 6. See below, III. ix. 6;
    IV. ii. 24.


VIII

Once when Aristippus (1) set himself to subject Socrates to a
cross-examination, such as he had himself undergone at the hands of
Socrates on a former occasion, (2) Socrates, being minded to benefit
those who were with him, gave his answers less in the style of a debater
guarding against perversions of his argument, than of a man persuaded of
the supreme importance of right conduct. (3)

 (1) For Aristippus see above, p. 38; for the connection, {boulomenos
    tous sunontas ophelein}, between this and the preceeding chapter,
    see above, Conspectus, p. xxvi.

 (2) Possibly in reference to the conversation above. In reference to
    the present dialogue see Grote, "Plato," I. xi. p. 380 foll.

 (3) For {prattein ta deonta} cf. below, III. ix. 4, 11; Plat. "Charm."
    164 B; but see J. J. Hartman, "An. Xen." p. 141.

Aristippus asked him "if he knew of anything good," (4) intending in
case he assented and named any particular good thing, like food or
drink, or wealth, or health, or strength, or courage, to point out
that the thing named was sometimes bad. But he, knowing that if a thing
troubles us, we immediately want that which will put an end to our
trouble, answered precisely as it was best to do. (5)

 (4) See Grote, "Plato," ii. 585, on Philebus.

 (5) Or, "made the happiest answer."

Soc. Do I understand you to ask me whether I know anything good for
fever?

No (he replied), that is not my question.

Soc. Then for inflammation of the eyes?

Aristip. No, nor yet that.

Soc. Well then, for hunger?

Aristip. No, nor yet for hunger.

Well, but (answered Socrates) if you ask me whether I know of any good
thing which is good for nothing, I neither know of it nor want to know.

And when Aristippus, returning to the charge, asked him "if he knew of
any thing beautiful."

He answered: Yes, many things.

Aristip. Are they all like each other?

Soc. On the contrary, they are often as unlike as possible.

How then (he asked) can that be beautiful which is unlike the beautiful?

Soc. Bless me! for the simple reason that it is possible for a man who
is a beautiful runner to be quite unlike another man who is a beautiful
boxer, (6) or for a shield, which is a beautiful weapon for the purpose
of defence, to be absolutely unlike a javelin, which is a beautiful
weapon of swift and sure discharge.

 (6) See Grote, "H. G." x. 164, in reference to Epaminondas and his
    gymnastic training; below, III. x. 6.

Aristip. Your answers are no better now than (7) when I asked you
whether you knew any good thing. They are both of a pattern.

 (7) Or, "You answer precisely as you did when..."

Soc. And so they should be. Do you imagine that one thing is good and
another beautiful? Do not you know that relatively to the same standard
all things are at once beautiful and good? (8) In the first place,
virtue is not a good thing relatively to one standard and a beautiful
thing relatively to another standard; and in the next place, human
beings, on the same principle (9) and relatively to the same standard,
are called "beautiful and good"; and so the bodily frames of men
relatively to the same standards are seen to be "beautiful and good,"
and in general all things capable of being used by man are regarded as
at once beautiful and good relatively to the same standard--the standing
being in each case what the thing happens to be useful for. (10)

 (8) Or, "good and beautiful are convertible terms: whatever is good is
    beautiful, or whatever is beautiful is good."

 (9) Or, "in the same breath." Cf. Plat. "Hipp. maj." 295 D; "Gorg."
    474 D.

 (10) Or, "and this standard is the serviceableness of the thing in
    question."

Aristip. Then I presume even a basket for carrying dung (11) is a
beautiful thing?

 (11) Cf. Plat. "Hipp. maj." 288 D, 290 D; and Grote's note, loc. cit.
    p. 381: "in regard to the question wherein consists {to kalon}?"

Soc. To be sure, and a spear of gold an ugly thing, if for their
respective uses--the former is well and the latter ill adapted.

Aristip. Do you mean to assert that the same things may be beautiful and
ugly?

Soc. Yes, to be sure; and by the same showing things may be good and
bad: as, for instance, what is good for hunger may be bad for fever, and
what is good for fever bad for hunger; or again, what is beautiful for
wrestling is often ugly for running; and in general everything is good
and beautiful when well adapted for the end in view, bad and ugly when
ill adapted for the same.

Similarly when he spoke about houses, (12) and argued that "the same
house must be at once beautiful and useful"--I could not help feeling
that he was giving a good lesson on the problem: "how a house ought to
be built." He investigated the matter thus:

 (12) See K. Joel, op. cit. p. 488; "Classical Review," vii. 262.

Soc. "Do you admit that any one purposing to build a perfect house (13)
will plan to make it at once as pleasant and as useful to live in as
possible?" and that point being admitted, (14) the next question would
be:

 (13) Or, "the ideal house"; lit. "a house as it should be."

 (14) See below, IV. vi. 15.

"It is pleasant to have one's house cool in summer and warm in winter,
is it not?" and this proposition also having obtained assent, "Now,
supposing a house to have a southern aspect, sunshine during winter will
steal in under the verandah, (15) but in summer, when the sun traverses
a path right over our heads, the roof will afford an agreeable shade,
will it not? If, then, such an arrangement is desirable, the southern
side of a house should be built higher to catch the rays of the winter
sun, and the northern side lower to prevent the cold winds finding
ingress; in a word, it is reasonable to suppose that the pleasantest and
most beautiful dwelling place will be one in which the owner can at
all seasons of the year find the pleasantest retreat, and stow away his
goods with the greatest security."

 (15) Or, "porticoes" or "collonades."

Paintings (16) and ornamental mouldings are apt (he said) to deprive one
of more joy (17) than they confer.

 (16) See "Econ." ix. 2; Plat. "Hipp. maj." 298 A; "Rep." 529; Becker,
    "Charicles," 268 (Engl. trans.)

 (17) {euphrosunas}, archaic or "poetical" = "joyance." See "Hiero,"
    vi. 1.

The fittest place for a temple or an altar (he maintained) was some site
visible from afar, and untrodden by foot of man: (18) since it was a
glad thing for the worshipper to lift up his eyes afar off and offer up
his orison; glad also to wend his way peaceful to prayer unsullied. (19)

 (18) e.g. the summit of Lycabettos, or the height on which stands the
    temple of Phygaleia. Cf. Eur. "Phoen." 1372, {Pallados
    khrusaspidos blepsas pros oikon euxato} of Eteocles.

 (19) See Vitruvius, i. 7, iv. 5, ap. Schneid. ad loc.; W. L. Newman,
    op. cit. i. 338.


IX

Being again asked by some one: could courage be taught, (1) or did
it come by nature? he answered: I imagine that just as one body is by
nature stronger than another body to encounter toils, so one soul by
nature grows more robust than another soul in face of dangers. Certainly
I do note that people brought up under the same condition of laws and
customs differ greatly in respect of daring. Still my belief is that by
learning and practice the natural aptitude may always be strengthened
towards courage. It is clear, for instance, that Scythians or
Thracians would not venture to take shield and spear and contend with
Lacedaemonians; and it is equally evident that Lacedaemonians would
demur to entering the lists of battle against Thracians if limited to
their light shields and javelins, or against Scythians without some
weapon more familiar than their bows and arrows. (2) And as far as I can
see, this principle holds generally: the natural differences of one man
from another may be compensated by artificial progress, the result of
care and attention. All which proves clearly that whether nature has
endowed us with keener or blunter sensibilities, the duty of all alike
is to learn and practise those things in which we would fain achieve
distinction.

 (1) Or, "When some one retorted upon him with the question: 'Can
    courage be taught?'" and for this problem see IV. vi. 10, 11;
    "Symp." ii. 12; Plat. "Lach."; "Protag." 349; "Phaedr." 269 D; K.
    Joel, op. cit. p. 325 foll.; Grote, "Plato," i. 468 foll., ii. 60;
    Jowett, "Plato," i. 77, 119; Newman, op. cit. i. 343.

 (2) Or, "against Thracians with light shields and javelins, or against
    Scythians with bows and arrows"; and for the national arms of
    these peoples respectively see Arist. "Lysistr." 563; "Anab." III.
    iv. 15; VI. VII. passim.

Between wisdom and sobriety of soul (which is temperance) he drew no
distinction. (3) Was a man able on the one hand to recognise things
beautiful and good sufficiently to live in them? Had he, on the other
hand, knowledge of the "base and foul" so as to beware of them? If so,
Socrates judged him to be wise at once and sound of soul (or temperate).
(4)

 (3) But cf. IV. vi. 7; K. Joel, op. cit. p. 363.

 (4) Reading {alla to... kai to}, or more lit. "he discovered the
    wise man and sound of soul in his power not only to recognise
    things 'beautiful and good,' but to live and move and have his
    being in them; as also in his gift of avoiding consciously things
    base." Or if {alla ton... kai ton...} transl. "The man who
    not only could recognise the beautiful and good, but lived, etc.,
    in that world, and who moreover consciously avoided things base, in
    the judgment of Socrates was wise and sound of soul." Cf. Plat.
    "Charm."

And being further questioned whether "he considered those who have
the knowledge of right action, but do not apply it, to be wise and
self-controlled?"--"Not a whit more," he answered, "than I consider them
to be unwise and intemperate. (5) Every one, I conceive, deliberately
chooses what, within the limits open to him, he considers most conducive
to his interest, and acts accordingly. I must hold therefore that
those who act against rule and crookedly (6) are neither wise nor
self-controlled.

 (5) For the phrase "not a whit the more" see below, III. xii. 1;
    "Econ." xii. 18. Al. "I should by no means choose to consider them
    wise and self-controlled rather than foolish and intemperate."

 (6) "Who cannot draw a straight line, ethically speaking."

He said that justice, moreover, and all other virtue is wisdom. That is
to say, things just, and all things else that are done with virtue,
are "beautiful and good"; and neither will those who know these things
deliberately choose aught else in their stead, nor will he who lacks the
special knowledge of them be able to do them, but even if he makes the
attempt he will miss the mark and fail. So the wise alone can perform
the things which are "beautiful and good"; they that are unwise cannot,
but even if they try they fail. Therefore, since all things just, and
generally all things "beautiful and good," are wrought with virtue, it
is clear that justice and all other virtue is wisdom.

On the other hand, madness (he maintained) was the opposite to wisdom;
not that he regarded simple ignorance as madness, (7) but he put it
thus: for a man to be ignorant of himself, to imagine and suppose that
he knows what he knows not, was (he argued), if not madness itself,
yet something very like it. The mass of men no doubt hold a different
language: if a man is all abroad on some matter of which the mass of
mankind are ignorant, they do not pronounce him "mad"; (8) but a like
aberration of mind, if only it be about matters within the scope
of ordinary knowledge, they call madness. For instance, any one who
imagined himself too tall to pass under a gateway of the Long Wall
without stooping, or so strong as to try to lift a house, or to attempt
any other obvious impossibility, is a madman according to them; but in
the popular sense he is not mad, if his obliquity is confined to small
matters. In fact, just as strong desire goes by the name of passion
in popular parlance, so mental obliquity on a grand scale is entitled
madness.

 (7) See K. Joel, op. cit. p. 346; Grote, "Plato," i. 400.

 (8) Or, "they resent the term 'mad' being applied to people who are
    all abroad," etc. See Comte, "Pos. Pol." i. 575; ii. 373 (Engl.
    trans.)

In answer to the question: what is envy? he discovered it to be a
certain kind of pain; not certainly the sorrow felt at the misfortunes
of a friend or the good fortune of an enemy--that is not envy; but, as
he said, "envy is felt by those alone who are annoyed at the successes
of their friends." And when some one or other expressed astonishment
that any one friendlily disposed to another should be pained at his
well-doing, he reminded him of a common tendency in people: when any one
is faring ill their sympathies are touched, they rush to the aid of the
unfortunate; but when fortune smiles on others, they are somehow pained.
"I do not say," he added, "this could happen to a thoughtful person; but
it is no uncommon condition of a silly mind." (9)

 (9) Or, "a man in his senses... a simpleton"; for the sentiment L.
    Dind. cf. Isocr. "ad Demonic." 7 D.

In answer to the question: what is leisure? I discover (he said) that
most men do something: (10) for instance, the dice player, (11) the
gambler, the buffoon, do something, but these have leisure; they can, if
they like, turn and do something better; but nobody has leisure to turn
from the better to the worse, and if he does so turn, when he has no
leisure, he does but ill in that.

 (10) See above, I. ii. 57; and in ref. to these definitions, K. Joel,
    op. cit. p. 347 foll.

 (11) For "dice-playing" see Becker, "Charicl." 354 (Engl. trans.); for
    "buffoonery," ib. 98; "Symp."

(To pass to another definition.) They are not kings or rulers (he said)
who hold the sceptre merely, or are chosen by fellows out of the street,
(12) or are appointed by lot, or have stepped into office by violence
or by fraud; but those who have the special knowledge (13) how to rule.
Thus having won the admission that it is the function of a ruler to
enjoin what ought to be done, and of those who are ruled to obey, he
proceeded to point out by instances that in a ship the ruler or captain
is the man of special knowledge, to whom, as an expert, the shipowner
himself and all the others on board obey. So likewise, in the matter
of husbandry, the proprietor of an estate; in that of sickness, the
patient; in that of physical training of the body, the youthful athlete
going through a course; and, in general, every one directly concerned in
any matter needing attention and care will either attend to this
matter personally, if he thinks he has the special knowledge; or, if he
mistrusts his own science, will be eager to obey any expert on the spot,
or will even send and fetch one from a distance. The guidance of this
expert he will follow, and do what he has to do at his dictation.

 (12) Tom, Dick, and Harry (as we say).

 (13) The {episteme}. See above, III. v. 21; Newman, op. cit. i. 256.

And thus, in the art of spinning wool, he liked to point out that women
are the rulers of men--and why? because they have the knowledge of the
art, and men have not.

And if any one raised the objection that a tyrant has it in his power
not to obey good and correct advice, he would retort: "Pray, how has
he the option not to obey, considering the penalty hanging over him who
disobeys the words of wisdom? for whatever the matter be in which he
disobeys the word of good advice, he will fall into error, I presume,
and falling into error, be punished." And to the suggestion that the
tyrant could, if he liked, cut off the head of the man of wisdom, his
answer was: "Do you think that he who destroys his best ally will go
scot free, or suffer a mere slight and passing loss? Is he more likely
to secure his salvation that way, think you, or to compass his own swift
destruction?" (14)

 (14) Or, "Is that to choose the path of safety, think you? Is it not
    rather to sign his own death-warrent?" L. Dind. cf. Hesiod, "Works
    and Days," 293. See Newman, op. cit. i. 393-397.

When some one asked him: "What he regarded as the best pursuit or
business (15) for a man?" he answered: "Successful conduct"; (16) and
to a second question: "Did he then regard good fortune as an end to
be pursued?"--"On the contrary," he answered, "for myself, I consider
fortune and conduct to be diametrically opposed. For instance, to
succeed in some desirable course of action without seeking to do so, I
hold to be good fortune; but to do a thing well by dint of learning and
practice, that according to my creed is successful conduct, (17) and
those who make this the serious business of their life seem to me to do
well."

 (15) Or, "the noblest study."

 (16) {eupraxia, eu prattein}--to do well, in the sense both of well or
    right doing, and of welfare, and is accordingly opposed to
    {eutukhia}, mere good luck or success. Cf. Plat. "Euthyd." 281 B.

 (17) Lit. "well-doing"; and for the Socratic view see Newman, op. cit.
    i. 305, 401.

They are at once the best and the dearest in the sight of God (18) (he
went on to say) who for instance in husbandry do well the things of
farming, or in the art of healing all that belongs to healing, or
in statecraft the affairs of state; whereas a man who does nothing
well--nor well in anything--is (he added) neither good for anything nor
dear to God.

 (18) Or, "most divinely favoured." Cf. Plat. "Euthyphro," 7 A.


X

But indeed, (1) if chance brought him into conversation with any one
possessed of an art, and using it for daily purposes of business, he
never failed to be useful to this kind of person. For instance, stepping
one time into the studio of Parrhasius (2) the painter, and getting into
conversation with him--

 (1) {alla men kai}... "But indeed the sphere of his helpfulness was
    not circumscribed; if," etc.

 (2) For Parrhasius of Ephesus, the son of Evenor and rival of Zeuxis,
    see Woltmann and Woermann, "Hist. of Painting," p. 47 foll.;
    Cobet, "Pros. Xen." p. 50 (cf. in particular Quint. XII. x. 627).
    At the date of conversation (real or ideal) he may be supposed to
    have been a young man.

I suppose, Parrhasius (said he), painting may be defined as "a
representation of visible objects," may it not? (3) That is to say, by
means of colours and palette you painters represent and reproduce as
closely as possible the ups and downs, lights and shadows, hard and
soft, rough and smooth surfaces, the freshness of youth and the wrinkles
of age, do you not?

 (3) Reading with Schneider, L. Dind., etc., after Stobaeus, {e
    graphike estin eikasia}, or if the vulg. {graphike estin e
    eikasia}, trans. "Painting is the term applied to a particular
    representation," etc.

You are right (he answered), that is so.

Soc. Further, in portraying ideal types of beauty, seeing it is not easy
to light upon any one human being who is absolutely devoid of blemish,
you cull from many models the most beautiful traits of each, and so make
your figures appear completely beautiful? (4)

 (4) Cf. Cic. "de Invent." ii. 1 ad in. of Zeuxis; Max. Tur. "Dissert."
    23, 3, ap. Schneider ad loc.

Parrh. Yes, that is how we do. (5)

 (5) Or, "that is the secret of our creations," or "our art of
    composition."

Well, but stop (Socrates continued); do you also pretend to represent in
similar perfection the characteristic moods of the soul, its captivating
charm and sweetness, with its deep wells of love, its intensity of
yearning, its burning point of passion? or is all this quite incapable
of being depicted?

Nay (he answered), how should a mood be other than inimitable, Socrates,
when it possesses neither linear proportion (6) nor colour, nor any of
those qualities which you named just now; when, in a word, it is not
even visible?

 (6) Lit. "symmetry." Cf. Plin. xxxv. 10, "primus symmetriam picturae
    dedit," etc.

Soc. Well, but the kindly look of love, the angry glance of hate at any
one, do find expression in the human subject, do they not? (7)

 (7) Or, "the glance of love, the scowl of hate, which one directs
    towards another, are recognised expressions of human feeling." Cf.
    the description of Parrhasius's own portrait of Demos, ap. Plin.
    loc. cit.

Parrh. No doubt they do.

Soc. Then this look, this glance, at any rate may be imitated in the
eyes, may it not?

Undoubtedly (he answered).

Soc. And do anxiety and relief of mind occasioned by the good or evil
fortune of those we love both wear the same expression?

By no means (he answered); at the thought of good we are radiant, at
that of evil a cloud hangs on the brow.

Soc. Then here again are looks with it is possible to represent?

Parrh. Decidedly.

Soc. Furthermore, as through some chink or crevice, there pierces
through the countenance of a man, through the very posture of his body
as he stands or moves, a glimpse of his nobility and freedom, or again
of something in him low and grovelling--the calm of self-restraint, and
wisdom, or the swagger of insolence and vulgarity?

You are right (he answered).

Soc. Then these too may be imitated?

No doubt (he said).

Soc. And which is the pleasanter type of face to look at, do you
think--one on which is imprinted the characteristics of a beautiful,
good, and lovable disposition, or one which bears the impress of what is
ugly, and bad, and hateful? (8)

 (8) For this theory cp. Ruskin, "Mod. P." ii. 94 foll. and indeed
    passim.

Parrh. Doubtless, Socrates, there is a vast distinction between the two.

At another time he entered the workshop of the sculptor Cleiton, (9) and
in course of conversation with him said:

 (9) An unknown artist. Coraes conj. {Kleona}. Cf. Plin. xxxiv. 19;
    Paus. v. 17, vi. 3. He excelled in portrait statues. See Jowett,
    "Plato," iv.; "Laws," p. 123.

You have a gallery of handsome people here, (10) Cleiton, runners, and
wrestlers, and boxers, and pancratiasts--that I see and know; but how
do you give the magic touch of life to your creations, which most of all
allures the soul of the beholder through his sense of vision?

 (10) Reading after L. Dind. {kaloi ous}, or if vulg. {alloious},
    translate "You have a variety of types, Cleiton, not all of one
    mould, but runners," etc.; al. "I see quite well how you give the
    diversity of form to your runners," etc.

As Cleiton stood perplexed, and did not answer at once, Socrates added:
Is it by closely imitating the forms of living beings that you succeed
in giving that touch of life to your statues?

No doubt (he answered).

Soc. It is, is it not, by faithfully copying the various muscular
contractions of the body in obedience to the play of gesture and poise,
the wrinklings of flesh and the sprawl of limbs, the tensions and
the relaxations, that you succeed in making your statues like real
beings--make them "breathe" as people say?

Cleit. Without a doubt.

Soc. And does not the faithful imitation of the various affections of
the body when engaged in any action impart a particular pleasure to the
beholder?

Cleit. I should say so.

Soc. Then the threatenings in the eyes of warriors engaged in battle
should be carefully copied, or again you should imitate the aspect of a
conqueror radiant with success?

Cleit. Above all things.

Soc. It would seem then that the sculptor is called upon to incorporate
in his ideal form the workings and energies also of the soul?

Paying a visit to Pistias, (11) the corselet maker, when that artist
showed him some exquisite samples of his work, Socrates exclaimed:

 (11) Cf. Athen. iv. 20, where the same artist is referred to
    apparently as {Piston}, and for the type of person see the
    "Portrait of a Tailor" by Moroni in the National Gallery--see
    "Handbook," Edw. T. Cook, p. 152.

By Hera! a pretty invention this, Pistias, by which you contrive that
the corselet should cover the parts of the person which need protection,
and at the same time leave free play to the arms and hands.... but
tell me, Pistias (he added), why do you ask a higher price for these
corselets of yours if they are not stouter or made of costlier material
than the others?

Because, Socrates (he answered), mine are of much finer proportion.

Soc. Proportion! Then how do you make this quality apparent to the
customer so as to justify the higher price--by measure or weight? For
I presume you cannot make them all exactly equal and of one pattern--if
you make them fit, as of course you do?

Fit indeed! that I most distinctly do (he answered), take my word for
it: no use in a corselet without that.

But then are not the wearer's bodies themselves (asked Socrates) some
well proportioned and others ill?

Decidedly so (he answered).

Soc. Then how do you manage to make the corselet well proportioned if it
is to fit an ill-proportioned body? (12)

 (12) Or, "how do you make a well-proportioned corselet fit an ill-
      proportioned body? how well proportioned?"

Pist. To the same degree exactly as I make it fit. What fits is well
proportioned.

Soc. It seems you use the term "well-proportioned" not in an absolute
sense, but in reference to the wearer, just as you might describe a
shield as well proportioned to the individual it suits; and so of a
military cloak, and so of the rest of things, in your terminology? But
maybe there is another considerable advantage in this "fitting"?

Pist. Pray instruct me, Socrates, if you have got an idea.

Soc. A corselet which fits is less galling by its weight than one which
does not fit, for the latter must either drag from the shoulders with a
dead weight or press upon some other part of the body, and so it becomes
troublesome and uncomfortable; but that which fits, having its weight
distributed partly along the collar-bone and shoulder-blade, partly
over the shoulders and chest, and partly the back and belly, feels like
another natural integument rather than an extra load to carry. (13)

 (13) Schneider ad loc. cf Eur. "Electr." 192, {prosthemata aglaias},
    and for the weight cf. Aristoph. "Peace," 1224.

Pist. You have named the very quality which gives my work its
exceptional value, as I consider; still there are customers, I am bound
to say, who look for something else in a corselet--they must have them
ornamental or inlaid with gold.

For all that (replied Socrates), if they end by purchasing
an ill-fitting article, they only become the proprietors of a
curiously-wrought and gilded nuisance, as it seems to me. But (he
added), as the body is never in one fixed position, but is at one time
curved, at another raised erect how can an exactly-modelled corselet
fit?

Pist. It cannot fit at all.

You mean (Socrates continued) that it is not the exactly-modelled
corselet which fits, but that which does not gall the wearer in the
using?

Pist. There, Socrates, you have hit the very point. I see you understand
the matter most precisely. (14)

 (14) Or, "There, Socrates, you have hit the very phrase. I could not
    state the matter more explicitly myself."


XI

There was once in the city a fair woman named Theodote. (1) She was
not only fair, but ready to consort with any suitor who might win her
favour. Now it chanced that some one of the company mentioned her,
saying that her beauty beggared description. "So fair is she," he added,
"that painters flock to draw her portrait, to whom, within the limits of
decorum, she displays the marvels of her beauty." "Then there is nothing
for it but to go and see her," answered Socrates, "since to comprehend
by hearsay what is beyond description is clearly impossible." Then he
who had introduced the matter replied: "Be quick then to follow me"; and
on this wise they set off to seek Theodote. They found her "posing" to a
certain painter; and they took their stand as spectators. Presently the
painter had ceased his work; whereupon Socrates:

 (1) For Theodote see Athen. v. 200 F, xiii. 574 F; Liban. i. 582. Some
    say that it was Theodote who stood by Alcibiades to the last,
    though there are apparently other better claimants to the honour.
    Plut. "Alc." (Clough, ii. p. 50).

"Do you think, sirs, that we ought to thank Theodote for displaying her
beauty to us, or she us for coming to gaze at her?... It would
seem, would it not, that if the exhibition of her charms is the more
profitable to her, the debt is on her side; but if the spectacle of her
beauty confers the greater benefit on us, then we are her debtors."

Some one answered that "was an equitable statement of the case."

Well then (he continued), as far as she is concerned, the praise we
bestow on her is an immediate gain; and presently, when we have spread
her fame abroad, she will be further benefited; but for ourselves the
immediate effect on us is a strong desire to touch what we have seen;
by and by, too, we shall go away with a sting inside us, and when we
are fairly gone we shall be consumed with longing. Consequently it seems
that we should do her service and she accept our court.

Whereupon Theodote: Oh dear! if that is how the matter stands, it is I
who am your debtor for the spectacle. (2)

 (2) In reference to the remark of Socrates above; or, "have to thank
    you for coming to look at me."

At this point, seeing that the lady herself was expensively attired,
and that she had with her her mother also, whose dress and style
of attendance (3) were out of the common, not to speak of the
waiting-women--many and fair to look upon, who presented anything but
a forlorn appearance; while in every respect the whole house itself was
sumptuously furnished--Socrates put a question:

 (3) Or, "her mother there with her in a dress and general get-up
    ({therapeia}) which was out of the common." See Becker,
    "Charicles," p. 247 (Eng. tr.)

Pray tell me, Theodote, have you an estate in the country?

Theod. Not I indeed.

Soc. Then perhaps you possess a house and large revenues along with it?

Theod. No, nor yet a house.

Soc. You are not an employer of labour on a large scale? (4)

 (4) Lit. "You have not (in your employ) a body of handicraftsmen of
    any sort?"

Theod. No, nor yet an employer of labour.

Soc. From what source, then, do you get your means of subsistence? (5)

 (5) Or, Anglice, "derive your income."

Theod. My friends are my life and fortune, when they care to be kind to
me.

Soc. By heaven, Theodote, a very fine property indeed, and far better
worth possessing than a multitude of sheep or goats or cattle. A flock
of friends!... But (he added) do you leave it to fortune whether a
friend lights like a fly on your hand at random, or do you use any
artifice (6) yourself to attract him?

 (6) Or, "means and appliances," "machinery."

Theod. And how might I hit upon any artifice to attract him?

Soc. Bless me! far more naturally than any spider. You know how they
capture the creatures on which they live; (7) by weaving webs of
gossamer, is it not? and woe betide the fly that tumbles into their
toils! They eat him up.

 (7) Lit. "the creatures on which they live."

Theod. So then you would counsel me to weave myself some sort of net?

Soc. Why, surely you do not suppose you are going to ensnare that
noblest of all game--a lover, to wit--in so artless a fashion? Do you
not see (to speak of a much less noble sort of game) what a number of
devices are needed to bag a hare? (8) The creatures range for their food
at night; therefore the hunter must provide himself with night dogs.
At peep of dawn they are off as fast as they can run. He must therefore
have another pack of dogs to scent out and discover which way they
betake them from their grazing ground to their forms; (9) and as they
are so fleet of foot that they run and are out of sight in no time, he
must once again be provided with other fleet-footed dogs to follow their
tracks and overtake them; (10) and as some of them will give even these
the slip, he must, last of all, set up nets on the paths at the points
of escape, so that they may fall into the meshes and be caught.

 (8) See the author's own treatise on "Hunting," vi. 6 foll.

 (9) Lit. "from pasture to bed."

 (10) Or, "close at their heels and run them down." See "Hunting"; cf.
    "Cyrop." I. vi. 40.

Theod. And by what like contrivance would you have me catch my lovers?

Soc. Well now! what if in place of a dog you can get a man who will hunt
up your wealthy lover of beauty and discover his lair, and having found
him, will plot and plan to throw him into your meshes?

Theod. Nay, what sort of meshes have I?

Soc. One you have, and a close-folding net it is, (11) I trow; to wit,
your own person; and inside it sits a soul that teaches you (12) with
what looks to please and with what words to cheer; how, too, with smiles
you are to welcome true devotion, but to exclude all wantons from your
presence. (13) It tells you, you are to visit your beloved in sickness
with solicitude, and when he has wrought some noble deed you are greatly
to rejoice with him; and to one who passionately cares for you, you are
to make surrender of yourself with heart and soul. The secret of true
love I am sure you know: not to love softly merely, but devotedly. (14)
And of this too I am sure: you can convince your lovers of your fondness
for them not by lip phrases, but by acts of love.

 (11) Or, "right well woven."

 (12) Lit. "by which you understand."

 (13) Or, "with what smiles to lie in wait for (cf. 'Cyrop.' II. iv.
    20; Herod. vi. 104) the devoted admirer, and how to banish from
    your presence the voluptary."

 (14) Or, "that it should be simply soft, but full of tender goodwill."

Theod. No, upon my word, I have none of these devices.

Soc. And yet it makes all the difference whether you approach a human
being in the natural and true way, since it is not by force certainly
that you can either catch or keep a friend. Kindness and pleasure
are the only means to capture this fearful wild-fowl man and keep him
constant.

Theod. You are right.

Soc. In the first place you must make such demands only of your
well-wisher as he can grant without repentance; and in the next place
you must make requital, dispensing your favours with a like economy.
Thus you will best make friends whose love shall last the longest and
their generosity know no stint. (15) And for your favours you will best
win your friends if you suit your largess to their penury; for, mark
you, the sweetest viands presented to a man before he wants them are apt
to prove insipid, or, to one already sated, even nauseous; but create
hunger, and even coarser stuff seems honey-sweet.

 (15) Or, "This is the right road to friendship--permanent and open-
    handed friendship."

Theod. How then shall I create this hunger in the heart of my friends?

Soc. In the first place you must not offer or make suggestion of your
dainties to jaded appetites until satiety has ceased and starvation
cries for alms. Even then shall you make but a faint suggestion to their
want, with modest converse--like one who would fain bestow a kindness...
and lo! the vision fades and she is gone--until the very pinch of
hunger; for the same gifts have then a value unknown before the moment
of supreme desire.

Then Theodote: Oh why, Socrates, why are you not by my side (like the
huntsman's assistant) to help me catch my friends and lovers?

Soc. That will I be in good sooth if only you can woo and win me.

Theod. How shall I woo and win you?

Soc. Seek and you will find means, if you truly need me.

Theod. Come then in hither and visit me often.

And Socrates, poking sly fun at his own lack of business occupation,
answered: Nay, Theodote, leisure is not a commodity in which I largely
deal. I have a hundred affairs of my own too, private or public, to
occupy me; and then there are my lady-loves, my dear friends, who will
not suffer me day or night to leave them, for ever studying to learn
love-charms and incantations at my lips.

Theod. Why, are you really versed in those things, Socrates?

Soc. Of course, or else how is it, do you suppose, that Apollodorus (16)
here and Antisthenes never leave me; or why have Cebes and Simmias come
all the way from Thebes to stay with me? Be assured these things cannot
happen without diverse love-charms and incantations and magic wheels.

 (16) For Apollodorus see "Apol." 28; Plat. "Symp." 172 A; "Phaed." 59
    A, 117 D. For Antisthenes see above. For Cebes and Simmias see
    above, I. ii. 48; Plat. "Crit." 45 B; "Phaed." passim.

Theod. I wish you would lend me your magic-wheel, (17) then, and I will
set it spinning first of all for you.

 (17) Cf. Theocr. ii. 17; Schneider ad loc.

Soc. Ah! but I do not wish to be drawn to you. I wish you to come to me.

Theod. Then I will come. Only, will you be "at home" to me?

Soc. Yes, I will welcome you, unless some one still dearer holds me
engaged, and I must needs be "not at home."


XII

Seeing one of those who were with him, a young man, but feeble of body,
named Epigenes, (1) he addressed him.

 (1) Epigenes, possibly the son of Antiphon. See Plat. "Apol." 33 E;
    "Phaed." 59 B.

Soc. You have not the athletic appearance of a youth in training, (2)
Epigenes.

 (2) {idiotikos}, lit. of the person untrained in gymnastics. See A. R.
    Cluer ad loc. Cf. Plat. "Laws," 839 E; I. ii. 4; III. v. 15;
    "Symp." ii. 17.

And he: That may well be, seeing I am an amateur and not in training.

Soc. As little of an amateur, I take it, as any one who ever entered the
lists of Olympia, unless you are prepared to make light of that contest
for life and death against the public foe which the Athenians will
institute when the day comes. (3) And yet they are not a few who, owing
to a bad habit of body, either perish outright in the perils of war, or
are ignobly saved. Many are they who for the self-same cause are taken
prisoners, and being taken must, if it so betide, endure the pains of
slavery for the rest of their days; or, after falling into dolorous
straits, (4) when they have paid to the uttermost farthing of all, or
may be more than the worth of all, that they possess, must drag on
a miserable existence in want of the barest necessaries until death
release them. Many also are they who gain an evil repute through
infirmity of body, being thought to play the coward. Can it be that you
despise these penalties affixed to an evil habit? Do you think you
could lightly endure them? Far lighter, I imagine, nay, pleasant even
by comparison, are the toils which he will undergo who duly cultivates
a healthy bodily condition. Or do you maintain that the evil habit
is healthier, and in general more useful than the good? Do you pour
contempt upon those blessings which flow from the healthy state? And
yet the very opposite of that which befalls the ill attends the
sound condition. Does not the very soundness imply at once health and
strength? (5) Many a man with no other talisman than this has passed
safely through the ordeal of war; stepping, not without dignity, (6)
through all its horrors unscathed. Many with no other support than this
have come to the rescue of friends, or stood forth as benefactors of
their fatherland; whereby they were thought worthy of gratitude, and
obtained a great renown and received as a recompense the highest honours
of the State; to whom is also reserved a happier and brighter passage
through what is left to them of life, and at their death they leave
to their children the legacy of a fairer starting-point in the race of
life.

 (3) Or, "should chance betide." Is the author thinking of a life-and-
    death struggle with Thebes?

 (4) e.g. the prisoners in the Latomiae. Thuc. vii. 87.

 (5) It is almost a proverb--"Sound of body and limb is hale and
    strong." "Qui valet praevalebit."

 (6) e.g. Socrates himself, according to Alcibiades, ap. Plat. "Symp."
    221 B; and for the word {euskhemonos} see Arist. "Wasps," 1210,
    "like a gentleman"; L. and S.; "Cyr." I. iii. 8; Aristot. "Eth.
    N." i. 10, 13, "gracefully."

Because our city does not practise military training in public, (7)
that is no reason for neglecting it in private, but rather a reason for
making it a foremost care. For be you assured that there is no contest
of any sort, nor any transaction, in which you will be the worse off for
being well prepared in body; and in fact there is nothing which men do
for which the body is not a help. In every demand, therefore, which can
be laid upon the body it is much better that it should be in the best
condition; since, even where you might imagine the claims upon the body
to be slightest--in the act of reasoning--who does not know the terrible
stumbles which are made through being out of health? It suffices to say
that forgetfulness, and despondency, and moroseness, and madness take
occasion often of ill-health to visit the intellectual faculties so
severely as to expel all knowledge (8) from the brain. But he who is in
good bodily plight has large security. He runs no risk of incurring any
such catastrophe through ill-health at any rate; he has the expectation
rather that a good habit must procure consequences the opposite to those
of an evil habit; (9) and surely to this end there is nothing a man in
his senses would not undergo.... It is a base thing for a man to wax old
in careless self-neglect before he has lifted up his eyes and seen
what manner of man he was made to be, in the full perfection of bodily
strength and beauty. But these glories are withheld from him who is
guilty of self-neglect, for they are not wont to blaze forth unbidden.
(10)

 (7) Cf. "Pol. Ath." i. 13; and above, III. v. 15.

 (8) Or, "whole branches of knowledge" ({tas epistemas}).

 (9) Or, "he may well hope to be insured by his good habit against the
    evils attendant on its opposite."

 (10) Or, "to present themselves spontaneously."


XII

Once when some one was in a fury of indignation because he had bidden a
passer-by good-day and the salutation was not returned, Socrates
said: "It is enough to make one laugh! If you met a man in a wretched
condition of body, you would not fall into a rage; but because you
stumble upon a poor soul somewhat boorishly disposed, you feel annoyed."

To the remark of another who complained that he did not take his food
with pleasure, he said: "Acumenus (1) has a good prescription for that."
And when the other asked: "And what may that be?" "To stop eating," he
said. "On the score of pleasure, economy, and health, total abstinence
has much in its favour." (2)

 (1) A well-known physician. See Plat. "Phaedr." 227 A, 269 A; "Symp."
    176 B. A similar story is told of Dr. Abernethy, I think.

 (2) Lit. "he would live a happier, thriftier, and healthier life, if
    he stopped eating."

And when some one else lamented that "the drinking-water in his house
was hot," he replied: "Then when you want a warm bath you will not have
to wait."

The Other. But for bathing purposes it is cold.

Soc. Do you find that your domestics seem to mind drinking it or washing
in it?

The Other. Quite the reverse; it is a constant marvel to me how
contentedly they use it for either purpose.

Soc. Which is hotter to the taste--the water in your house or the hot
spring in the temple of Asclepius? (3)

 (3) In the Hieron at Epidauros probably. See Baedeker, "Greece," p.
    240 foll.

The Other. The water in the temple of Asclepius.

Soc. And which is colder for bathing--yours or the cold spring in the
cave of Amphiaraus? (4)

 (4) Possibly at Oropos. Cf. Paus. i. 34. 3.

The Other. The water in the cave of Amphiaraus.

Soc. Then please to observe: if you do not take care, they will set you
down as harder to please than a domestic servant or an invalid. (5)

 (5) i.e. "the least and the most fastidious of men."

A man had administered a severe whipping to the slave in attendance
on him, and when Socrates asked: "Why he was so wroth with his own
serving-man?" excused himself on the ground that "the fellow was a lazy,
gourmandising, good-for-nothing dolt--fonder of money than of work." To
which Socrates: "Did it ever strike you to consider which of the two in
that case the more deserves a whipping--the master or the man?"

When some one was apprehending the journey to Olympia, "Why are you
afraid of the long distance?" he asked. "Here at home you spend nearly
all your day in taking walks. (6) Well, on your road to Olympia you will
take a walk and breakfast, and then you will take another walk and dine,
and go to bed. Do you not see, if you take and tack together five or six
days' length of walks, and stretch them out in one long line, it will
soon reach from Athens to Olympia? I would recommend you, however,
to set off a day too soon rather than a day too late. To be forced to
lengthen the day's journey beyond a reasonable amount may well be a
nuisance; but to take one day's journey beyond what is necessary is pure
relaxation. Make haste to start, I say, and not while on the road." (7)

 (6) {peripateis}, "promenading up and down."

 (7) "Festina lente"--that is your motto.

When some one else remarked "he was utterly prostrated after a long
journey," Socrates asked him: "Had he had any baggage to carry?"

"Not I," replied the complainer; "only my cloak."

Soc. Were you travelling alone, or was your man-servant with you?

He. Yes, I had my man.

Soc. Empty-handed, or had he something to carry?

He. Of course; carrying my rugs and other baggage.

Soc. And how did he come off on the journey?

He. Better than I did myself, I take it.

Soc. Well, but now suppose you had had to carry his baggage, what would
your condition have been like?

He. Sorry enough, I can tell you; or rather, I could not have carried it
at all.

Soc. What a confession! Fancy being capable of so much less toil than
a poor slave boy! Does that sound like the perfection of athletic
training?


XIV

On the occasion of a common dinner-party (1) where some of the company
would present themselves with a small, and others with a large supply
of viands, Socrates would bid the servants (2) throw the small supplies
into the general stock, or else to help each of the party to a share all
round. Thus the grand victuallers were ashamed in the one case not
to share in the common stock, and in the other not to throw in their
supplies also. (3) Accordingly in went the grand supplies into the
common stock. And now, being no better off than the small contributors,
they soon ceased to cater for expensive delicacies.

 (1) For the type of entertainment see Becker, "Charicles," p. 315
    (Eng. tr.)

 (2) "The boy."

 (3) Or, "were ashamed not to follow suit by sharing in the common
    stock and contributing their own portion."

At a supper-party one member of the company, as Socrates chanced to
note, had put aside the plain fare and was devoting himself to certain
dainties. (4) A discussion was going on about names and definitions,
and the proper applications of terms to things. (5) Whereupon Socrates,
appealing to the company: "Can we explain why we call a man a 'dainty
fellow'? What is the particular action to which the term applies?
(6)--since every one adds some dainty to his food when he can get it.
(7) But we have not quite hit the definition yet, I think. Are we to be
called dainty eaters because we like our bread buttered?" (8)

 (4) For the distinction between {sitos} and {opson} see Plat. "Rep."
    372 C.

 (5) Or, "The conversation had fallen upon names: what is the precise
    thing denoted under such and such a term? Define the meaning of so
    and so."

 (6) {opsophagos} = {opson} (or relish) eater, and so a "gourmand" or
    "epicure"; but how to define a gourmand?

 (7) Lit. "takes some {opson} (relish) to his {sitos} (food)."

 (8) Lit. "simply for that" (sc. the taking of some sort of {opson}.
    For {epi touto} cf. Plat. "Soph." 218 C; "Parmen." 147 D.)

No! hardly! (some member of the company replied).

Soc. Well, but now suppose a man confine himself to eating venison or
other dainty without any plain food at all, not as a matter of training,
(9) but for the pleasure of it: has such a man earned the title? "The
rest of the world would have a poor chance against him," (10) some
one answered. "Or," interposed another, "what if the dainty dishes he
devours are out of all proportion to the rest of his meal--what of him?"
(11)

 (9) Lit. "{opson} (relish) by itself, not for the sake of training,"
    etc. The English reader wil bear in mind that a raw beefsteak or
    other meat prescribed by the gymnastic trainer in preference to
    farinaceous food ({sitos}) would be {opson}.

 (10) Or, more lit. "Hardly any one could deserve the appellation
    better."

 (11) Lit. "and what of the man who eats much {opson} on the top of a
    little ({sitos})?" {epesthion} = follows up one course by another,
    like the man in a fragment of Euripides, "Incert." 98: {kreasi
    boeiois khlora suk' epesthien}, who "followed up his beefsteak
    with a garnish of green figs."

Soc. He has established a very fair title at any rate to the
appellation, and when the rest of the world pray to heaven for a fine
harvest: "May our corn and oil increase!" he may reasonably ejaculate,
"May my fleshpots multiply!"

At this last sally the young man, feeling that the conversation set
somewhat in his direction, did not desist indeed from his savoury
viands, but helped himself generously to a piece of bread. Socrates was
all-observant, and added: Keep an eye on our friend yonder, you others
next him, and see fair play between the sop and the sauce. (12)

 (12) Lit. "see whether he will make a relish of the staple or a staple
    of the relish" ("butter his bread or bread his butter").

Another time, seeing one of the company using but one sop of bread
(13) to test several savoury dishes, he remarked: Could there be a more
extravagant style of cookery, or more murderous to the dainty dishes
themselves, than this wholesale method of taking so many dishes
together?--why, bless me, twenty different sorts of seasoning at one
swoop! (14) First of all he mixes up actually more ingredients than the
cook himself prescribes, which is extravagant; and secondly, he has the
audacity to commingle what the chef holds incongruous, whereby if the
cooks are right in their method he is wrong in his, and consequently the
destroyer of their art. Now is it not ridiculous first to procure the
greatest virtuosi to cook for us, and then without any claim to their
skill to take and alter their procedure? But there is a worse thing in
store for the bold man who habituates himself to eat a dozen dishes at
once: when there are but few dishes served, out of pure habit he will
feel himself half starved, whilst his neighbour, accustomed to send his
sop down by help of a single relish, will feast merrily, be the dishes
never so few.

 (13) {psomos}, a sop or morsel of bread (cf. {psomion}, N. T., in mod.
    Greek = "bread").

 (14) Huckleberry Finn (p. 2 of that young person's "Adventures")
    propounds the rationale of the system: "In a barrel of odds and
    ends it is different; things get mixed up, and the juice kind of
    swaps around, and the things go better."

He had a saying that {euokheisthai}, to "make good cheer," (15) was
in Attic parlance a synonym for "eating," and the affix {eu} (the
attributive "good") connoted the eating of such things as would not
trouble soul or body, and were not far to seek or hard to find. So
that to "make good cheer" in his vocabulary applied to a modest and
well-ordered style of living. (16)

 (15) {euokheisthai}, cf. "Cyrop." IV. v. 7; "Pol. Ath." ii. 9; Kuhner
    cf. Eustah. "ad Il." ii. p. 212, 37, {'Akhaioi ten trophen okhen
    legousin oxutonos}. Athen. viii. 363 B. See "Hipparch," viii. 4,
    of horses. Cf. Arist. "H. A." viii. 6.

 (16) See "Symp." vi. 7; and for similar far-fetched etymologies, Plat.
    "Crat." passim.




