CHAPTER XXXIII.

FROM ALBANY TO NIAGARA.


Carl took the afternoon train on the following day for Buffalo. His
thoughts were busy with the startling discovery he had made in regard
to his stepmother. Though he had never liked her, he had been far from
imagining that she was under the ban of the law. It made him angry
to think that his father had been drawn into a marriage with such a
woman--that the place of his idolized mother had been taken by one who
had served a term at Sing Sing.

Did Peter know of his mother’s past disgrace? he asked himself. Probably
not, for it had come before his birth. He only wondered that the secret
had never got out before. There must be many persons who had known
her as a prisoner, and could identify her now. She had certainly been
fortunate with the fear of discovery always haunting her. Carl could
not understand how she could carry her head so high, and attempt to
tyrannize over his father and himself.

What the result would be when Dr. Crawford learned the antecedents
of the woman whom he called wife Carl did not for a moment doubt. His
father was a man of very strict ideas on the subject of honor, and good
repute, and the discovery would lead him to turn from Mrs. Crawford in
abhorrence. Moreover, he was strongly opposed to divorce, and Carl
had heard him argue that a divorced person should not be permitted to
remarry. Yet in ignorance he had married a divorced woman, who had been
convicted of theft, and served a term of imprisonment. The discovery
would be a great shock to him, and it would lead to a separation and
restore the cordial relations between himself and his son.

Not long after his settlement in Milford; Carl had written as follows to
his father:


“Dear Father:--Though I felt obliged to leave home for reasons which we
both understand, I am sure that you will feel interested to know how I
am getting along. I did not realize till I had started out how difficult
it is for a boy, brought up like myself, to support himself when thrown
upon his own exertions. A newsboy can generally earn enough money to
maintain himself in the style to which he is accustomed, but I have had
a comfortable and even luxurious home, and could hardly bring myself to
live in a tenement house, or a very cheap boarding place. Yet I would
rather do either than stay in a home made unpleasant by the persistent
hostility of one member.

“I will not take up your time by relating the incidents of the first two
days after I left home. I came near getting into serious trouble through
no fault of my own, but happily escaped. When I was nearly penniless
I fell in with a prosperous manufacturer of furniture who has taken me
into his employment. He gives me a home in his own house, and pays me
two dollars a week besides. This is enough to support me economically,
and I shall after a while receive better pay.

“I am not in the office, but in the factory, and am learning the
business practically, starting in at the bottom. I think I have a taste
for it, and the superintendent tells me I am making remarkable progress.
The time was when I would have hesitated to become a working boy, but I
have quite got over such foolishness. Mr. Jennings, my employer, who is
considered a rich man, began as I did, and I hope some day to occupy a
position similar to his.

“I trust you are quite well and happy, dear father. My only regret is,
that I cannot see you occasionally. While my stepmother and Peter form
part of your family, I feel that I can never live at home. They both
dislike me, and I am afraid I return the feeling. If you are sick or
need me, do not fail to send for me, for I can never forget that you are
my father, as I am your affectionate son,

“Carl.”


This letter was handed to Dr. Crawford at the breakfast table. He
colored and looked agitated when he opened the envelope, and Mrs.
Crawford, who had a large share of curiosity, did not fail to notice
this.

“From whom is your letter, my dear?” she asked, in the soft tone which
was habitual with her when she addressed her husband.

“The handwriting is Carl’s,” answered Dr. Crawford, already devouring
the letter eagerly.

“Oh!” she answered, in a chilly tone. “I have been expecting you would
hear from him. How much money does he send for?”

“I have not finished the letter.” Dr. Crawford continued reading. When
he had finished he laid it down beside his plate.

“Well?” said his wife, interrogatively. “What does he have to say? Does
he ask leave to come home?”

“No; he is quite content where he is.”

“And where is that?”

“At Milford.”

“That is not far away?”

“No; not more than sixty miles.”

“Does he ask for money?”

“No; he is employed.”

“Where?”

“In a furniture factory.”

“Oh, a factory boy.”

“Yes; he is learning the business.”

“He doesn’t seem to be very ambitious,” sneered Mrs. Crawford.

“On the contrary, he is looking forward to being in business for himself
some day.”

“On your money--I understand.”

“Really, Mrs. Crawford, you do the boy injustice. He hints nothing of
the kind. He evidently means to raise himself gradually as his employer
did before him. By the way, he has a home in his employer’s family. I
think Mr. Jennings must have taken a fancy to Carl.”

“I hope he will find him more agreeable than I did,” said Mrs. Crawford,
sharply.

“Are you quite sure that you always treated Carl considerately, my
dear?”

“I didn’t flatter or fondle him, if that is what you mean. I treated him
as well as he could expect.”

“Did you treat him as well as Peter, for example?”

“No. There is a great difference between the two boys. Peter is always
respectful and obliging, and doesn’t set up his will against mine. He
never gives me a moment’s uneasiness.”

“I hope you will continue to find him a comfort, my dear,” said Dr.
Crawford, meekly.

He looked across the table at the fat, expressionless face of his
stepson, and he blamed himself because he could not entertain a warmer
regard for Peter. Somehow he had a slight feeling of antipathy, which he
tried to overcome.

“No doubt he is a good boy, since his mother says so,” reflected the
doctor, “but I don’t appreciate him. I will take care, however, that
neither he nor his mother sees this.”

When Peter heard his mother’s encomium upon him, he laughed in his
sleeve.

“I’ll remind ma of that when she scolds me,” he said to himself. “I’m
glad Carl isn’t coming back. He was always interferin’ with me. Now,
if ma and I play our cards right we’ll get all his father’s money. Ma
thinks he won’t live long, I heard her say so the other day. Won’t it be
jolly for ma and me to come into a fortune, and live just as we please!
I hope ma will go to New York. It’s stupid here, but I s’pose we’ll have
to stay for the present.”

“Is Carl’s letter private?” asked Mrs. Crawford, after a pause.

“I--I think he would rather I didn’t show it,” returned her husband,
remembering the allusion made by Carl to his stepmother.

“Oh, well, I am not curious,” said Mrs. Crawford, tossing her head.

None the less, however, she resolved to see and read the letter, if she
could get hold of it without her husband’s knowledge. He was so careless
that she did not doubt soon to find it laid down somewhere. In this she
proved correct. Before the day was over, she found Carl’s letter in her
husband’s desk. She opened and read it eagerly with a running fire of
comment.

“‘Reasons which we both understand,’” she repeated, scornfully. “That is
a covert attack upon me. Of course, I ought to expect that. So he had a
hard time. Well, it served him right for conducting himself as he did.
Ah, here is another hit at me--‘Yet I would rather do either than live
in a home made unpleasant by the persistent hostility of one member.’
He is trying to set his father against me. Well, he won’t succeed. I can
twist Dr. Paul Crawford round my finger, luckily, and neither his son
nor anyone else can diminish my influence over him.”

She read on for some time till she reached this passage: “While my
stepmother and Peter form a part of your family I can never live at
home. They both dislike me, and I am afraid I return the feeling.”
 “Thanks for the information,” she muttered. “I knew it before. This
