
HABITS AND MEN.




                             HABITS AND MEN,
                                   WITH
                            Remnants of Record
                                 TOUCHING
                           THE MAKERS OF BOTH.

                                    BY
                                DR. DORAN,
      AUTHOR OF ‘TABLE TRAITS,’ ‘HISTORY OF READING,’ ‘LIFE OF DR.
                              YOUNG,’ ETC.

                                  “See, sitting here,
                Just face to face with you, in cheery guise,
                A real, live gossip; to your charities
                Do I appeal, my friends.”—_T. Westwood._

                             _THIRD EDITION._

                                 LONDON:
                 RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET,
                  Publisher in Ordinary to Her Majesty.
                                  1855.

                                PRINTED BY
                 JOHN EDWARD TAYLOR, LITTLE QUEEN STREET,
                          LINCOLN’S INN FIELDS.




                      THESE “TRIVIAL, FOND RECORDS”
                                 TOUCHING
                              Habits and Men
               ARE INSCRIBED TO A GOOD MAN, OF GOOD HABITS,
                                    TO
                       HENRY HOLDEN FRANKUM, ESQ.,
        IN TESTIMONY OF THE ESTEEM AND REGARD ENTERTAINED FOR HIM
                        BY HIS VERY SINCERE FRIEND

                                                               THE AUTHOR.




CONTENTS.


                                                                PAGE

    BETWEEN YOU AND ME                                             1

    MAN, MANNERS, AND A STORY WITH A MORAL TO IT                   9

    ADONIS AT HOME AND ABROAD, PART I.                            26

    ADONIS AT HOME AND ABROAD, PART II.                           40

    REMNANTS OF STAGE DRESSES                                     60

    THREE ACTS AND AN EPILOGUE                                    67

    THE TIRING-BOWERS OF QUEENS                                   88

    “LA MODE” IN HER BIRTHPLACE                                  114

    HATS                                                         129

    WIGS AND THEIR WEARERS                                       141

    BEARDS AND THEIR BEARERS                                     158

    SWORDS                                                       168

    GLOVES, B⸺S, AND BUTTONS                                     185

    STOCKINGS                                                    200

    “MASKS AND FACES”                                            204

    PUPPETS FOR GROWN GENTLEMEN                                  212

    TOUCHING TAILORS                                             227

    WHY DID THE TAILORS CHOOSE ST. WILLIAM FOR THEIR PATRON?     229

    THE TAILORS MEASURED BY THE POETS                            240

    SIR JOHN HAWKWOOD, THE HEROIC TAILOR                         261

    GEORGE DÖRFLING, THE MARTIAL TAILOR                          275

    ADMIRAL HOBSON, THE NAVAL TAILOR                             283

    JOHN STOW, THE ANTIQUARIAN TAILOR                            285

    JOHN SPEED, THE ANTIQUARIAN TAILOR                           296

    SAMUEL PEPYS, THE OFFICIAL TAILOR                            300

    RICHARD RYAN, THE THEATRICAL TAILOR                          309

    PAUL WHITEHEAD, THE POET TAILOR                              315

    MEMS. OF “MERCHANT TAILORS”                                  322

    CHAPTERS ON BEAUX                                            337

    THE BEAUX OF THE OLDEN TIME                                  337

    BEAU FIELDING                                                347

    BEAU NASH                                                    356

    THE PRINCE DE LIGNE                                          370

    BEAU BRUMMELL                                                378

    DOCTORS READY DRESSED                                        395

    ODD FASHIONS                                                 402




BETWEEN YOU AND ME.

    “Here, Sir, you’ll find, by way of prologue,
    A choice imbroglio. Philosophy
    Gay in her gravity; and Poesy
    Casting her spangles on the theme of dress.
    Lik’st thou’t not, no merry Christmas to thee!”

                                         OLD PLAY.


It is remarked by Mr. T. C. Grattan, in his ‘Jacqueline of Holland,’
that the “suitableness of raiment and the becomingness of manners are
links in the chain of social life, which harmonize with and beautify the
whole. There is infinitely more wisdom,” he adds “in submitting to than
in spurning those necessary concomitants of civilization, which, being
artificial throughout, require the cement of elegance and refinement
to polish, if it cannot lighten, the chain.” I offer this pinch of
philosophy to those who like to be tempted by something didactic. I would
not, for the world, however, have them believe that I shall repeat the
temptation, or follow the example, in my illustrations of ‘Habits and
Men.’ And when I say “Men,” I would imply _man_ in its general sense,—a
sense in which “woman” has the better and more perfect half; for, as the
poet sings of Nature,—

        “Her ’prentice han’
        She tried on man,
    An’ then she made the lasses, oh!”

The latter, consequently, will come in for their share in these trivial,
fond records. For, have not the poets loved especially to dress and
undress them? And have not the nymphs been consenting? None have defied
them, save

    “Fair Rhodope, as story tells,
    The bright, unearthly nymph who dwells
    ’Mid sunless gold and jewels hid,
    The Lady of the Pyramid.”

Rhodope has been a snare to the versifiers; but I recognize in her a
lady who loved home, and dressed as well when there as her more gadding
sisters do only when abroad.

If Rhodope be the only maid who has puzzled the poets, Butler is the only
poet who has seriously libelled the maids, and their mothers. See what
the rude fellow says of ladies in their company suits and faces:—

    “Yes, ’tis in vain to think to guess
    At women, by appearances;
    That paint and patch their imperfections
    Of intellectual complexions,
    And daub their tempers o’er with washes
    As artificial as their faces.”

It is certainly strange that women, in earlier days, when they dealt in
neither washes nor washing, should have been gravely commended for that
less commendable fashion. Thus, Thomas of Ely lays down a very nasty
maxim when he describes the toilet of Queen St. Ethelreda:—“Quæ enim lota
erat corde, non necesse erat ut lavabatur corpore” (who was so thoroughly
well-washed in heart that she never found it necessary to wash her
person).

Very well! I only wish this lady could have been married to the Irish
Saint Angus Keledeus (_Kele De_, “God worshiper,” thence Culdees). They
would have had a nice household of it; for the gentleman in question had
the barn and the mill-work of his convent, and, as he _never_ cleaned
himself, some of the grain which stuck in his hair and about his hairy
body, used to grow as in a good soil, and then he pulled it out; gaining
a portion of his bread in this nasty field. St. Angus, all over _ears_,
would have been a novelly dressed bridegroom for Ethelreda, newly washed,
in imagination!

“Tut!” said St. Romnald, “filthy habits are the anchors by which holy
hermits are kept fast in their cells; once let them dress well and smell
nicely, and worldly people will invite them to their parties.” Depend
upon it, when Ethelreda left off her habits of cleanliness, she wickedly
thought of seducing some St. Angus to come and be her resident confessor!

A better example was shown by that saintly sovereign, Jayme II. of
Mayorca, who made ministers of his tailors, as George IV. made tailors
of his ministers, who set those useful dignitaries to work in superb
offices, wherein no profane person dared tread. On the garments made, no
profane person dared lay a hand; the number of suits was seven, for the
seven great festivals; and when these were completed, all the inhabitants
were compelled to celebrate the event by a voluntary illumination.

Certainly, Ethelreda did not sit for the original of Cowley’s ‘Clad all
in White,’ wherein he says:—

    “Fairest thing that shines below,
      Why in this robe dost thou appear?
    Wouldst thou a white most perfect show,
      Thou must at all no garment wear:
    Thou wilt seem much whiter so
    Than winter when ’tis clad with snow.”

But, altogether, Cowley cannot be said to dress his ladies well. He would
banish all art, just as the nymphs in hoop-petticoats banished all
nature. Herrick is the man, to my thinking, who has hit the happy medium,
in his ‘Delight in Disorder’:—

    “A sweet disorder in the dress,
    Kindles in clothes a playfulness.
    A lawn about the shoulder thrown
    Into a fine distraction;
    An erring lace, which here and there
    Inthrals the crimson stomacher;
    A cuff neglectful, and thereby
    Ribbons to flow confusedly;
    A winning wave, deserving note,
    In the tempestuous petticoat;
    A careless shoe-string, in whose tie
    I see a wild civility;
    Do more bewitch me, than when art
    Is too precise in every part.”

Herrick was exquisitely taken by the “liquefaction,” as he calls it, of
his Julia’s robes, and his very heart was rumpled by their “glittering
vibration.” He dresses her in the airy fashion which Moore followed when
called upon to deck his Nora Creina:—

    “The airy robe I did behold,
    As airy as the leaves of gold,
    Which erring here and wandering there,
    Pleased with transgression ev’rywhere:
    Sometimes ’twould pant, and sigh, and heave,
    As if to stir it scarce had leave;
    But having got it, thereupon
    ’Twould make a brave expansion,
    And pounced with stars, it show’d to me
    Like a celestial canopy.”

Göthe, that lover of many ladies, never decks one wholly, but now and
then he makes a gift interpreting his taste, as when Lamon remarks, in
the ‘Laune des Verliebten’:—

    “Die Rose seh’ ich gern in einem schwarzen Haar.”

The French poets put all their swains in tight gloves and loose
principles; and their nymphs are as anxious about their dress, as though
there were _soirées_ in Tempe, and a _Longchamps_ in Arcadia. Thus
Chénier’s Naïs bids Daphnis not to crease her veil, and, with a shrewd
idea of the cost of a new frock, how snappishly does the pretty thing
reply to the invitation to recline on the shady bank:—

            “Vois, cet humide gazon
    Va souiller ma tunique!”

How pure, compared or not compared with this calculating nymph, is the
Madeline of Endymion Keats. The English poet undresses his young maiden
with a “niceness” that gives us as much right to look as Porphyro:—

                        “Her vespers done,
      Of all its wreathed pearls her hair she frees;
    Unclasps her warmed jewels one by one;
      Loosens her fragrant boddice; by degrees
      Her rich attire creeps rustling to her knees:
    Half-hidden, like a mermaid in seaweed,
    Pensive awhile, she dreams awake.”

It is clear that this lady, although belonging to a more artificial
society than Naïs, thinks less of her dress, and more of her principles.
Not but that ladies have a fine eye for the snares by which they may
either catch or be caught.

There is something in the following, from an old Spanish ballad (‘A
aquel caballero, madre’), which proves what I say, and may be useful to
gentlemen when contemplating the subject of costume:—

    To that cavalier, dear mother,
      When a child, I simply told
    How three kisses I would owe him:
      I must pay them, now I’m old!

    I am now sixteen, dear mother:
      If the noble youth should come,
    And call upon his little debtor,
      Sighing for him here at home;—
    Should he come with feathers dancing,
      Helm of steel and spurs of gold,
    And claim the kisses that I owe him,
      I—would pay him, now I’m old!

    “Hush, child! this is not the language
      Worthy a Castilian maid,
    One too promised to the altar,
      Convent’s gloom, and cloister’s shade.
    For thou’rt given to St. Cecil,
      To her holy shrine thou’rt sold;—
    Will not my sweet one read her missal?”
      “Yes!—I’ll pay him now I’m old!”

Grave commentators on this ballad suggest, that if the cavalier had not
been a superbly dressed cavalier, the little maiden would have forgotten
her vow; and in the south of Spain, when a man is inclined to become
heedless of external adornment, he is warned of the peril of losing the
three kisses of St. Cecilia’s Nun.

But the overture to my “opera” is extending beyond due limits; and
as I have hitherto been repeating snatches from the airs of others,
I will here add, to save my honour, one of my own. It is well known
that Henrietta Maria mostly favoured the colour known as the Maiden’s
Blush,—from the rose of that pretty name. The following lines will show

         HOW THE ROSE GOT ITS HUE.

    One starry eve, as Psyche lay
      Beneath a cistus bower’s shade,
    Tearing the flowers in idle play,
    Young Love came tripping by, that way,
      And to the girl thus, laughing, said,—

    The sweetest rose that ever eye
      Yet smiled upon I plucked but now;
    Pure as the stars in yon blue sky
    And whiter than the flowers that lie
      In wreaths about thy sunny brow.

    The sweetest rose that ever spent
      Its balmy store of scented bliss
    About thy locks, or gently bent
    Above thy bow’r, had ne’er the scent
      That lies enshrined, my soul, in this.

    Oh for a name, my gentle girl,
      That mortals fittingly may call
    This matchless rose, of flowers the pearl!—
    Look, sweet, how soft the petals curl!
      A name!—and thou shalt have them all.

    While Love thus urged his pretty suit,
      And to the blushing girl drew near,
    He softly struck his golden lute,
    As Psyche sat, entranced and mute,
      Drinking the sounds with willing ear.

    And when the golden lute was hush’d,
      And Love still nearer drew, to seek
    His usual meed from lips that flush’d
    With softer hues than ever blush’d
      Upon his own sweet mother’s cheek,—

    He whisper’d something soft and low,
      With arm and flower around her thrown,
    That call’d upon her cheeks a glow
    Which shed upon the leaves of snow
      A hue still deeper than her own.

    And Love, rejoicing, mark’d the rush
      Of soft and rosy light that came
    Upon the flower, which caught the flush
    From Psyche’s cheek, whose maiden blush
      Gave to the rose both hue and name.

Between the days when Psyche blushed on the rose, and the age when
Delamira bought her blushes at fifteen shillings the pot, there is a
long period;—nature at one end, and hoop-petticoats at the other. The
fashion of the latter had got so preposterous, that Mr. William Jingle,
coachmaker and chairmaker of the Liberty of Westminster, invented for
the service of the ladies “a round chair in the form of a lantern, six
yards and a half in circumference, with a stool in the centre of it;
the said vehicle being so contrived, as to receive the passenger, by
opening in two in the middle, and closing mathematically, when she is
seated.” Honest Jingle also “invented a coach for the reception of one
lady only, who is to be let in at the top.” For these inventions he asked
the patronage of that Censor of Great Britain, Mr. Isaac Bickerstaff,—and
therefore it must be true. However, how wide the time between the
blushes of Psyche and the era of hoops! Now it is something connected
with costume, during this interval, and subsequent to it, that I am now
about to speak. These words, between you and me, reader, have been as
the fragments of airs, which in musical introductions give us an inkling
of more fulness to come. I will only pause to add a sentiment from
Cowper;—but that would really be worse than Joseph Surface. No, reader! I
will fling in my sentiment at the end, and here invite you to consider a
subject, whose title heads the following page.




MAN, MANNERS, AND A STORY WITH A MORAL TO IT.

    “Les hommes font les lois, les femmes font les mœurs.”—DE SÉGUE.


“L’homme est un animal!” said a French orator, by way of peroration to
his first speech in the Chamber of Deputies; “Man is an animal!”—and
there he stopped. He found his subject exhausted, and he sat down in
confusion. Thereupon his own familiar friend arose, and suggested that it
was desirable that the honourable gentleman’s speech should be printed,
_with a portrait of the author_!

The definition is, as far as it goes, a plagiarism from Plato. In the
Apophthegmata of Diogenes Laertius, it is stated that Plato defined
Man as an animal with two legs and without feathers. The definition
having been generally approved of, Diogenes went into the school of the
philosopher, carrying with him a cock, which he had stripped of his
plumage. “Here,” said he, “is Plato’s man!” Plato saw that his definition
needed improvement, and he added to it “with broad nails.” He might have
further said, “and needing something in place of feathers.”

So much depends upon this substitute, and so much more is thought of
habits than of manners,—that is, morals,—and of the makers of the former
than the teachers of the latter, that it is popularly and properly
said, “The tailor makes the man.” No doubt of it; and tailors are far
better paid than tutors. The Nugees keep country-houses and recline in
carriages; the philosophers are accounted of as _nugæ_, and plod on foot
to give golden instruction for small thanks and a few pence. _Their_
device, if they are ever so ennobled as to be thought worthy of one,
might be that of the patriotic ladies of Prussia, who, before the time
when their country became a satrapy of Muscovy, exchanged their golden
adornments for an iron ring, on which was engraved the legend, “_Ich gab
Gold um Eisen_,”—I gave gold for iron.

This being the case, it is little to be wondered at that man is more
careful about his dress than his instruction. The well-dressed man looks,
at all events, like a man well to do; and how profound is the respect of
the world for a man who may be catalogued as “_well to do_!” That man
thoroughly understood the meaning of the term who, when on his trial for
murder, and anticipating an acquittal, invited his counsel to dinner. The
invitation was accepted, but, the verdict rendering the inviter incapable
of even ordering a dinner for himself, the intended guest frowned on the
convict, and went and dined with the prosecutor.

Philosophy has done its best to cure man of vanity in dress; but
philosophy has been vain,—and so has man. “For a man to be fantastic and
effeminate in attire,” says Stobæus, “is unpardonable. It is next to
Sardanapalus’s spinning among women. To such I would say, Art thou not
ashamed, when Nature hath made thee a man, to make thyself a woman?”

Seneca hath something to the same purpose, and not altogether
inapplicable in our days. “Some of the manly sex amongst us,” says he,
“are so effeminate, that they would rather have the commonwealth out
of order, than their hair; they are more solicitous about trimming and
sprucing up their heads, than they are of their health or of the safety
of the public; and are more anxious to be fine than virtuous.” Sir Walter
Raleigh asserts that “No man is esteemed for gay garments, but by fools
and women,”—an assertion which shows that his philosophy and his civility
were both in a ragged condition. Sir Matthew Hale throws the blame where
it ought to be borne, when he declares that the vanity of loving fine
clothes and new fashions, and valuing _ourselves_ by them, is one of the
most childish pieces of folly that can be.

The philosophy of the judge is “truer steel” than that of the soldier.
But, for philosophy in describing a dress, I know nothing that can
surpass that of the poor Irishman, who, looking down at his own garment
of million tatters, smilingly said that it was “made of holes.”

There is very good philosophy in the story of Nessus and his tunic. We
all know how the story is told in history, and that it therefore cannot
be true. Apollodorus and Pausanias, Diodorus, Ovid, and Seneca, have all
told the same tale, without guessing at the truth which lies hid in it.
It is to this effect:—When Hercules was on his way to the court of Ceyx,
king of Trachinia, in company with his “lady,” Dejanira, the travellers
came to the swollen river of Evenus. Nessus, the centaur, politely
carried the lady over, and became very rude to her on the opposite bank.
The stalwart husband, from the other shore, observing what was going
on, sent one of his shafts, dipped in the poison of the Lernæan Hydra,
right into the centaur’s heart. Nessus, while dying, presented his
shirt,—that is, his tunic,—to Dejanira, informing her that if she could
persuade Hercules to wear it, he would never behave to her otherwise
than as a gentleman. Now, as he never had yet so comported himself—for
he was a dreadful bully—Dejanira accepted the gift; and, as the hero was
soon after found flirting with his old love Iole, and was vain of his
appearance, she sent the gay garment to him, and he had no sooner donned
it than death clasped him, and the hero was transferred to where there
were so many other powerful rascals,—the halls of Olympus. So much for
fiction, and those never-to-be-trusted poets. Here is the truth.

Nessus was a ridiculous old dandy, with a juvenile wig and reprobate
principles. He courted Hercules’ “lady,” and so flattered her that she
became fonder than ever of fashionable garments, and even accepted a
shawl from the centaur, who had ordered it in the name of the husband,
and left him to pay for it. Hercules forgot his vexation in the _beaux
yeux_ of Iole; and remembering how the “old beast,” as he used to
call the centaur, had contrived to sun himself in Dejanira’s eyes, he
adopted the fashion of Nessus; and, lightly as nymphs were dressed in
the days of Iole, he ran up a right royal bill at the milliner’s, and no
more thought of what he should have to pay than the Duke of York, when
ordering cashmeres for Anna Maria Clarke. The fall of the year however
came, and therewith the “little account,” with an intimation that a
speedy settlement would oblige. Hercules, hero as he was, felt his heart
fail him as he looked at “the tottle of the whole,” and he fell into such
extravagances that, being hunted to death by bailiffs, and his honesty
as small as that of the proprietor of an ultra-pietist paper who cheats
his editor, he took the benefit of the act, and retired to the country,
where he kept a shabby chariot, drawn by only two mangy leopards, and
ultimately died, like other heroes, bewailing his amiable weaknesses.

But let us go further back than to mythology, in order to examine the
origin of dress.

It may be said (and I hope without profanity) that sewing came in with
sin; or rather, it was one of the first consequences of the first crime.
Perhaps, for this reason, has a certain degree of contempt been inherited
by the professors of the art. The trade of a tailor is not honoured
with mention in any part of the Scriptures. Gardening was the early
occupation, and hence horticulture is accounted refined. Tubal Cain was
the first worker in iron; and from his time down to a very late period,
the employment which required much exercise of muscular strength had the
precedence of mere sedentary callings. The French, indeed, as becomes
a nation which prides itself as being the most particular touching the
external dressing of a man, has always confessed to a sort of tender
regard for the tailor. The vocation against which Gallic wits direct
their light-winged shafts, is that of the grocer. The _épicier_ with
them is a man whose soul does not rise above _lait de poule_ and cotton
nightcaps. He is generally the coward in farces, while heroism is not
made separable from the melancholy wielders of the needle.

In France however we may still trace a remnant of the time when the
highest honour was awarded to the pliers of the heaviest tools, or the
workmen whose vocation had a spice of peril in it. Thus the farrier
smith, in France, still enjoys a courtesy rank which places him on a
nominal equality with the tried commanders of valiant hosts; and if
Soult was Marshal of France, so every Gallic farrier is “_maréchal
ferrant_”—the marshal of the workers in iron.

As weavers and fullers are noticed in Holy Writ, while the tailor is
passed over in silence, it is probable that he had no distinct status
among the Jews, and that, during a long period at least, every man was
his own _costumier_. In other countries the tailor and the physician were
both slaves, and probably the first was as little or less of a bungler
than the second; for the _servus vestiarius_ could often improve the
outer man, when the _servus medicus_ could not do as much for the inner
one.

Under the old dispensation, sewing, as I have said, followed sin; and
he who forged a bill-hook or a brand was in higher esteem than he who
lived by the exercise of the needle. Under a later dispensation we find
examples of this order of precedency being reversed. Lydia of Thyatira
was among the first who joined Paul in prayer, by the riverside at
Philippi. Her office was to make up into garments the purple cloth for
which Lydia itself was famous. With this proselyte Paul dwelt, and on her
he left a blessing. It was not so with a certain strong handicraftsman.
When Paul was once at the point of death he bethought him of an old
vicious adversary, and said, “Alexander the coppersmith did me much evil;
the Lord reward him according to his works!” And by this we not only
see that he who taught so wisely could sometimes err against his own
instructions, but we may even make this strange circumstance profitable
to us by viewing in it the proof that even the nearest to heaven are not
entirely free from the stains of earth; and that the spirit truly worthy
of immortality has never yet been found in aught that was mortal.

And this reminds me, that while every Jew learned some trade, there
is none recorded as having learned that of a tailor. The coppersmiths
endeavour to disconnect their calling from the excommunication of Paul,
by asserting that the Alexander who did evil to Paul, by maligning
him and by broaching heresies upon the resurrection, was really a
philosopher, who was only a coppersmith for his amusement. This however
is not likely, for it was not usual to designate learned men by the
name of their adopted trades. And however this may be, it was Lydia the
maker of purple vests who obtained the blessing, while Alexander the
coppersmith inherited the curse.

And may I here remark,—for I hope to be permitted to indulge in a good
deal of “cross stitch” in these unpretending sketches,—that the best of
men of modern times can, like St. Paul, be vigorously minded against
their opponents. I will only cite Cowper, who was more wrathful than the
Apostle, without the provocation by which the latter was judicially moved.

Cowper is certainly the sweetest of our didactic poets. He is elevated
in his ‘Table Talk;’ acute in detailing the ‘Progress of Error;’ and he
chants the praises of ‘Truth’ in more dulcet notes than were ever sounded
by the fairest swan in Cayster. His ‘Expostulation’ is made in the tones
of a benevolent sage. His ‘Hope’ and his ‘Charity’ are proofs of his pure
Christian-like feeling;—a feeling which also pervades his ‘Conversation’
and his ‘Retirement,’ and which barbs the shafts of his satire without
taking away from their strength. The same praise is due to the six books
of the ‘Task,’ of which perhaps the _Garden_ is the least successful
portion. If however we be disposed to find fault at all with anything
in his sentiment or expression, it would be in this,—that while he
celebrates in warm praises the delights of his own peaceful and retired
life—a life which, on the respectable authority of the old medical
writer Celsus, I may call as hurtful to the body as it is profitable or
necessary to the mind (“Literarum disciplina, ut animo præcipue omnium
necessaria, sic corpori inimica est”), there is some illiberality in
his declaring that the various occupations of other and more active men
are either frivolous or criminal. Cowper patiently enjoys holding the
ravelled thread for ladies to wind it on to their bobbins, but he sneers
at the party who sits down to chess or stands up to billiards. He will
praise air and exercise, if you will only take them in company with
_him_, in covered walks where there is what he so well and quaintly calls

    “An obsolete prolixity of shade.”

But if you enjoy your air and exercise in field sports, you are more
ignoble than your groom, and a greater brute than the victim you pursue.
Again: he acknowledges change of scene to be beneficial to the animal
economy; but he intends thereby a change from one parish to another.
You must not go to France for change, without being undeniably anything
but a gentleman and a Christian. He is ready too to eat game and dine
on venison, but he would not, for the world, be so guilty as to course
a hare or shoot a buck. Finally, he would listen with all imaginable
pleasure and rapture to the strains of Handel, were they only composed
to the glory and praise of Damon and Dolly, rather than, as they are, to
the eulogy of the Messiah and in illustration of His sacrifice.

But why, it may be asked, this piece of patchwork with Cowper’s name
thereon? Well, Cowper was something of a tailor in his way, and could
sew a button on his sleeve as adroitly, if not as any tailor in town, at
least as any sailor in the fleet. And in this he was something akin to
Pope Pius VII. when prisoner at Fontainebleau.

What a heavy captivity was that!—not so much for the prisoner, as for
those who were compelled to listen to the long and dreary and pointless
stories of the good-natured and weak old man. When the officers who
had this Pope in charge, were conducting him from Rome to Paris, they
on one occasion shut him up in a coach-house, where he remained seated
in his carriage, while his captors dined. Cardinal Pacca says of this
Pope, who was an admirable tailor when necessity pressed him, that,
during the eighteen months he was resident at Fontainebleau, he could
never be prevailed upon to quit his own suite of apartments. He, and the
Cardinals who accompanied him, were employed in conjugating the verb
_s’ennuyer_. He loved a little gossip, and hated books; but the captive
had a solace—one worthy of the dignity of Diocletian, when he cultivated
cabbages. Savary, Duke de Rovigo, who was chief gaoler over the chief
Pontiff, says, of the latter, that “he did not open a book the livelong
day; and he occupied himself in things which, if I had not myself seen,
I never should have believed; stitching and mending, for instance,
holes and rents in his clothes, sewing a button on his breeches, and
washing with his own hands his dressing-gown, on which he had a habit of
allowing his snuff to fall in large quantities.” Savary is especially,
and naturally, astonished that the supreme Pontiff preferred his amateur
tailoring to enjoying the books in the great library of Fontainebleau.
Poor man! he did not like reading, but he did like killing time at the
point of the needle. The tailors of his community are doubtless proud
of such a patron. The story rests on Savary’s authority; and while
Cardinal Pacca abuses him for telling it, his Eminence does not deny its
authenticity.

       *       *       *       *       *

But we must not allow the Pope and his pursuits to take us away from the
consideration of sacred things. Reverting therefore to the Jews, it may
be said of them that if they did not possess the tailor as a professor,
they had a sufficient variety of dress to perplex the domestic ministers
of fashion. There is quite as much perplexity for those who have to
write about it. The Jews, like the modern children of the Prophet, would
not tolerate the representation of any living figure, and the antiquary
has therefore no chance of consulting a Hebrew ‘Journal des Modes.’
The monuments of nations distant from Palestine cannot be accepted as
authority when they are said to represent the Jewish people, for we have
no assurance that the people _are_ thereon represented; or if they be
Jews, that they are, in slavery, wearing a national costume.

Of one thing however there is a certainty. The Jews _had_ a national
costume; and, except in ceremonial dresses and some female appendages,
it had very little resemblance indeed to the costume of the Egyptians.
The material of Jewish garments was manufactured at home; the skilful
hands of the women spinning and weaving the raw material afforded by
the flocks. Not _all_ the women appear to have been given to the useful
work. There were some fine ladies among the multitude that came out
of Egypt, and these had an aristocratically foolish contempt for the
spinners and tailoresses of the tribes. But I would especially recommend
my fair readers to remember the sacred record, which ennobles labour,
where it says:—“All the women that were _wise-hearted_ did spin with
their hands, and brought that which they had spun, both of blue, and of
purple, and of scarlet, and of fine linen;” and again it is said,—and
it sounds like God’s blessing upon the daughters of toil,—“And all the
women whose _hearts stirred them up in wisdom_ spun goats’ hair.” No
doubt these women, whose hearts were the thrones of wisdom, were primeval
tailoresses. And much value was set upon the habits which they made, the
shaping of which, I may add, presented little difficulty. The principal
article of dress was an ample woollen garment,—a cloak by day, and a
couch by night. It served two purposes, like Goldsmith’s stocking, which,
at night, he drew from his feet to place on his head. Much value, I have
said, was attached to this garment; as, for instance: “If thou at all
take thy neighbour’s raiment to pledge, thou shalt deliver it to him by
that the sun goeth down. For that is his covering only; it is the raiment
for his skin: wherein shall he sleep? And it shall come to pass, when he
crieth unto Me, that I will hear; for I am gracious.”

At Beni Hassan, in Egypt, there are some painted representations of men
who are supposed to be the counterfeit presentment of Jews fresh from
their own country, and therefore in undoubted Jewish costume. The men
are variously attired: they are all sandalled. Some wear only short
tunics, others a cloak over the tunic. This cloak or plaid, for it is of
a striped and figured pattern, and is described as resembling the fine
grass-woven cloth of the South Sea, is worn over the left shoulder and
under the right arm, leaving the latter free for action. Other figures
are clad in fringed shirts, or tunics of the same material as the plaid,
reminding one of the command given unto Moses in the fifteenth chapter
of Numbers: “Speak unto the children of Israel, and bid them that they
make them fringes in the borders of their garments throughout their
generations, and that they put upon the fringe of the borders a ribbon of
blue.” And again, in Deuteronomy: “Thou shalt make thee fringes upon the
four quarters of thy vesture, wherewith thou coverest thyself:” and it
will be remembered that a formal observance of this command gave ground
for censure, when the Jews were, at a later period, reproached because
“all their works they do for to be seen of men; they make broad their
phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their garments.”

The garments in the paintings at Beni Hassan are of the very simplest
construction. The Hebrew maker of them could hardly have committed the
trifling mistake made by Andrew Fern, the weather-brained tailor of
Cromarty, who used, says Hugh Miller, “to do very odd things, especially
when the moon was at the full, and whom the writer remembers from the
circumstance that Andrew fabricated for him his first jacket, and that
though he succeeded in sewing on one sleeve to the hole at the shoulder,
where it ought to be, he committed the slight mistake of sewing on the
other sleeve to one of the pocket-holes!” There are no pocket-holes
visible in the Jewish garments.

The Jews soon learned to enlarge their fringes. In the Valley of Bab el
Malook, near Thebes, Belzoni discovered a tomb in which is represented
the triumph of Pharaoh Necho, after the victory over the Jews at Megiddo.
The Jews, among the captives, look very much like Highlanders, with
nothing on but kilts kept down about the knees by leaded bunches of
ribbons,—a fashion not unknown to modern Ballerinas, who wear “very thin
clothing, and but little of it.” The captives, however, have probably
been stripped of their upper garments, which the conquerors may be
supposed to have sold to the tailors of Misraim, whereupon to model new
fashions for the modish dwellers by the purple Nile.

The Rabbins had some curious ideas touching the original form of Adam,
and the peculiar dress made for him and Eve before the Fall. Bartolozzi,
in his ‘Bibliotheca Rabbinica,’ notices the tradition that the father of
mankind was originally furnished with a tail, but that it was cut off
by his Maker, because he looked better without it. Another tradition
asserts that, before the fall, Adam and Eve had a transparent covering,
a robe of light, of which remnants are left to mankind in the nails of
the hands and feet. Let me add, for the sake of those who are fond of
adopting primeval colours, that the original hue of the father of man is
said to have been a bottle-green. When Stulz furnished Mr. Haynes with
his celebrated pea-green coat, the _schneider_ only made him as closely
resembling as he could to Eliezer the Tanaite, in his bright green
gabardine. And Eliezer if a good patron to tailors, and a wearer of gay
colours, was also one of the most learned of men. It is said of him, that
if all the firmament were changed into parchment, and the entire ocean
into ink, it would not suffice to write all that he knew; for he was the
author, among other brief works, of three hundred volumes, solely upon
the subject of sowing cucumbers. Perhaps Stulz wished to make the wooer
of Miss Foote look as like a philosopher as possible, for Eliezer was not
the only sage who walked the world in verdant suit. When Amelia Opie paid
her visit to Godwin in Somers’ Town, the teacher of the peoples wore over
a fiery crimson waistcoat a bottle-green coat, the colour of the original
man, from whom Godwin of course very much doubted whether he really
_were_ descended.

The Jews, as rather given to luxury in dress, would have been excellent
patrons of the tailors, but for Christian jealousy. In Spain and
Portugal, the rich Hebrews were the unqualified delight of the most
orthodox of tailors—who loved to dress even more than they did to burn
them. But the ultra-pietism of the Queen Regent at Valladolid, in the
year 1412,—a year when the prospects of the unfortunate descendants of
Israel were particularly gloomy,—put a clog upon trade, without, in any
degree, accelerating religion. The counsellor of the Queen was Brother
Vincent Ferrer, the inveterate enemy of the Jewish nation. The two
together fulminated a decree, in the name of the infant monarch, Don
John, which in substance declared that the Jews should live apart, and
exercise no trade or calling that was either respectable or profitable.
The tailors of Castile would not have been much troubled at this decree,
for their old customers had saved money enough to make the fortunes of
the entire trade, had it not been for one of the concluding clauses,
which did more injury to Christians than to Jews. By these clauses Jews
were forbidden to wear cloaks, and were restricted to long robes, of poor
materials, over their clothes. The Jewesses were ordered to wear common
mantles reaching to their feet, and with hoods to be worn over the head.
Disobedience to these clauses was to be visited by “the forfeiture of all
the clothes they may have on, to their under garments.” An additional
clause fixed against them the canon of a sumptuary law; and no tailor
dared to supply to a Jew a suit, the cloth of which cost upwards of
thirty maravedis. If the tailor offended against this decree, the Church
admonished him, but the law scourged the Jew. The first time a Hebrew
donned a suit worth more than the thirty maravedis, he forfeited the
suit, and was sent home in his shirt. For a second offence, he forfeited
his entire wardrobe; but Justice kept him warm by administering to him
a hundred lashes, vigorously applied by the hand of an executioner, who
imagined that the more blood he drew the better Heaven would be pleased.
For a third indulgence in forbidden finery the Jew was mulcted of all
he possessed; “but,” says the gracious Queen Regent, “it is my pleasure
that, if the Jews choose, they may make coats and cloaks of the clothes
which they now possess.” How lucky for Baron Rothschild that he is not
compelled, like his predecessors, to carry his cast-off clothes to his
tailor, and have one new coat made out of two old garments!

The Persian Jews were as ill-content at having their tailors’ bills
regulated by the Government as were those of the Peninsula. When the
Persian Caliphs, who would allow nobody to be well-dressed but the
faithful, closed the colleges at Babylon, and expelled the professors,
it is said that nobody wept for the latter so much as the handicraftsmen
who used to adorn their outward persons. Of these expelled professors, a
corsair captured at sea Rabbi Moses, his handsome wife, and their son,
Rabbi Hanoch. On their way to Cordova, some Tarquinian-like overtures
were made to the lady, who, walking up to her husband, inquired if those
drowned at sea would be resuscitated at the resurrection? The Rabbi
smiled, and answered with the text:—“The Lord said, I will bring again
from Bashan, I will bring again from the depths of the sea.” Thereupon
the Hebrew Lucretia plunged into the waves, and her husband into a
reverie, in which the calmly-pleasant abounded.

The Jews of Cordova redeemed the other captives, and the first visit of
Rabbi _père_ was to a tailor, of whom he ordered an outfit of sackcloth.
The honest man was disgusted with his customer’s taste, and valued below
cost-price a philosopher who declared that his logic was always more
conclusive in sackcloth than in habits spun from finer webs. Attired in
his new suit, he entered the Jewish college, where a learned dispute
was being carried on with equal warmth and obtuseness. A few words
from the mean stranger had an effect like the sun upon a fog, and the
president quitting his chair, the man in sackcloth was voted into it by
acclamation. The tailor, who had followed out of curiosity, ran to the
captain of the corsair, and told him that his late captive was a rare
man, of whose value he had been ignorant; and therewith the captain
would fain have had the sale cancelled, but the Caliph of Cordova
would not listen to such a proposition. Hanoch, the son of Moses, was
even more fortunate than his sire, for he espoused a daughter of the
House of Peliag. Hanoch displayed such liberality on the occurrence of
this union, that for a long time the corporation of tailors, whom he
especially benefited on this occasion, were accustomed to name one son
in their respective families after so liberal a patron of the craft. The
two Jewish households on that day were long celebrated at the hearths
of those who made their dresses. The wedding feast was held at Zahara,
near the city, and not less than seven hundred Israelites rode thither in
costumes that would have dazzled the Incas. Ask a well-to-do Cordovese
tailor as to the state of his vocation, and, if he has not now forgotten
the once popular legend, he will answer, “It is almost as flourishing,
Sir, as in the days of Hanoch, whom our predecessors cursed as a Jew,
and blessed as a customer.” It was a neatly cut distinction, and fitted
exactly.

Deformity of principle, as well as deformity of person, may sometimes
be the mother of Fashion. Thus it is stated by an old French writer,
that “the use of great purfles and slit coates was introduced by wanton
women;” but he adds, with great unction, that the fashion of these
lemans had been adopted by the princesses and ladies of England; and
with them he trusts that it will long remain. The same author shows
how a fair lady, by following the fashion thus lightly set, became the
victim of Satan himself. It must be premised that the author’s daughters
had been very desirous of indulging in furred garments, and purfles,
and slashed coats; and as the father saved himself from a long bill at
the dressmaker’s by telling the following story, I calculate upon the
gratitude of all sires similarly beset, if the telling of it here, and by
them to their respective young ladies, should be followed by the desired
consequences,—which I do not at all anticipate.

A certain knight having lost his wife, and not being at all sure as to
the locality in which her spirit rested, applied to a devout hermit,
who picked up a living by revealing that sort of secret. In our own
days, the Rev. Mr. Godfrey professes to get at the same mystery by dint
of table-turning. Well; the reverend gentleman’s ancestor, the hermit,
thought upon the question by going to sleep over it; and when he awoke,
he informed the knight that he had been, in a vision, to the tribunal
of souls, and that he had there learned all about the lady in question.
He had seen St. Michael and Lucifer standing opposite each other, and
between them a pair of scales, in one of which was placed the lady’s
soul, with its select assortment of good deeds; and in the other, all
her evil actions. A fiend, with all her garments and jewellery in his
possession, was looking on. The beam of the balance had not yet made a
movement, when the impetuous St. Michael was about generously to claim
the soul thus weighed. Thereupon Lucifer urbanely remarked, that he would
take the liberty of informing his once-esteemed friend of a fact probably
unknown to him. “This woman,” said he, “had no less than ten gowns and
as many coats; and you know as well as I do, my good Michael, that half
the quantity would have sufficed for her requirements, and would not have
been contrary to the law of God.”

St. Michael looked rather offended at its being supposed that he knew
anything about women and their gear, and suggested that too much
intercourse with both had been the ruin of his ex-colleague.

“Fier comme un Archange!” was the commentary of the deboshed Lucifer,
who, according to some old fathers, tempted Eve in very excellent French.
However that may be, he added, “the value of one of this pretty wanton’s
superfluous gowns or coats would have clothed and kept forty poor men
through a whole winter: and the mere waste cloth from them would have
saved two or three from perishing. Touche-fille,” he said, addressing the
fiend who carried the finery, “throw those traps into the scale.” The
fiend obeyed, by casting them in where the lady’s bad actions lay; and
straightway down sank that scale, and upward flew the beam which bore
the soul and its ounce of virtues. This was done with such a jerk that
the soul itself fell into the outspread arms of Touche-fille, who made
off with his prey, without waiting for further award. Lucifer looked
inquiringly at St. Michael; but the latter observed, that though his
opponent’s aide-de-camp had been somewhat too hasty, he would not dispute
the case any further. “But what, may I ask, do you intend to do with her?”

“She shall have a new dress daily, and fancy herself ugly in all.”

“Umph!” said Michael, “you certainly are the most exquisite of torturers.”

“And Michael, despite his modesty, _does_ know what most vexes a woman!”

“Go to ⸺;” whither, the last person addressed had not time to say. He was
interrupted by Lucifer, who remarked:—

“I have business upon earth. My affairs at home are well cared for in my
absence by a regency.”

And so they parted; and the moral of the tale is, that luxury in dress
tends to lead to the Devil. And though it be lightly said, it is also
truly said. Let us look through the book of patterns, wherein we may
trace the varieties of costume, its fashion and its follies, and see how
what was irreproachable today becomes ridiculous tomorrow.




ADONIS AT HOME AND ABROAD.

PART I.

    “L’habit est une partie intégrante de l’homme; il agit sur nos
    sens, et détermine notre jugement.”—LA BRUYERE.


Our ancestors, in early days, had what may be called early ways. They
were in no respect superior to New Zealanders in a savage state.
Civilization has however copied some of their customs, and old ladies who
paint their cheeks and necks are not much further advanced than their
ancestors, who coloured themselves all over, and _that_ not out of vanity.

Strabo says that the people in the west of England shaved their chins,
but cherished mustachios, wore black garments, and carried a stick. This
description might serve for half the gentlemen who are to be seen in
Regent Street and Rotten Row during the “season.” But I suppose one _may_
take the liberty to doubt that the Cradocks of today really resemble so
closely as the description would seem to warrant, their progenitors the
Caradocs of other times, who “looked like furies,” says Strabo, “but were
in fact quiet and inoffensive people.”

The early Welsh bards, we are told, dressed in sky-blue; the modern bards
of the million are content to breakfast on it: the British astronomers
wore green, which was not indicative of what the colour might have stood
for,—a verdant knowledge of the science. When the Romans planted their
conquering eagles on our soil, the old British chieftains resisted them
and their fashions. Tacitus says that it was the sons of the chieftains
who first adopted the Roman mode; and no doubt the old gentlemen were
disgusted when they beheld their unpatriotic young heirs wandering about
without their _braccæ_, and sporting the tunic before whose presence
liberty and trousers had disappeared, but not for ever.

The Saxons brought in their own fashions, and some of these still
prevail; the smock-frock, for instance, is the old Saxon tunic without
the belt. Such a dress was never known in Ireland nor in Scotland: the
Saxons kept for whole centuries to a fixed fashion, as may be seen in
any illustrated work on costume. In this respect they were only less
tenacious than the Persians, whose garments passed from father to son
as long as they could hold together. It would be difficult, I fancy, to
persuade any modern young Anglo-Saxon to draw on the _scanc-beorg_, or
shank-coverers, of his respected and deceased “governor.” It is only
the mantles of our Peers that descend hereditarily upon the shoulders
of succeeding generations; and some of these mantles look dingy
enough to date their origin from the time when Henry III. established
Tothill-fields Fair, in order to spite the Londoners. The latter, it
will be remembered, were compelled to close their shops for an entire
fortnight during the holding of the fair in Westminster; and the man on
Tower Hill who wanted to furnish his outward or inward person with the
smallest article was compelled to resort for it to the neighbourhood of
the Abbey, or to do without till the fair was raised.

The taste of the Anglo-Saxons was rather of a splendid character, but
sometimes questionable. A lady with blue hair, for instance, could
not have been half so pleasant to look at as a lady with blue eyes;
though the custom of dyeing the hair blue was perhaps scarcely more
objectionable than that of the young ladies and gentlemen of Gaul, who
washed theirs in a chalky solution, in order to make it a more fiery red
than it had been rendered by nature. I may add that, of the tasteful
Anglo-Saxons, the nuns were the most especially tasteful; and the
gorgeous attire of the sisters, with other attractions, seems to have
stirred the very hearts of some of the most stony of prelates.

Many of the latter however were rigidly severe in their censures against
the luxurious dressing of lively Saxon nuns; but their objurgations take
very much the form of that delivered by Tartuffe when he handed his
kerchief to Dorine:—

    “Couvrez ce sein que je ne sçaurais voir:
    A de tels objets les yeux sont blessés,
    Et cela fait venir de coupables pensées.”

Though it be necessary to consider climate and temperature in the matter
of dress, we have had weather, even in England, from the severity of
which no dress could protect the wearer. Thus, in the year 851, the
winter became so suddenly cold and inclement, and went on with such
increasing severity, that clothing afforded no warmth to the frame, and
the people were widely smitten by paralysis. They suffered excruciating
anguish in the limbs; generally the arms and hands were first seized
upon by the disease, and those limbs usually became altogether withered
and useless. The paralysis respected neither rank, age, nor sex; the
highest dignitaries of the Church did not escape, though, of course,
they miraculously recovered. The clothiers of the period appear to have
been as much puzzled to discover a material for useful wear that would
meet the contingency, as a modern tailor would find it difficult to
take measure of the pulpy, shapeless, boneless being which Professor
Whewell, in his ‘Plurality of Worlds,’ thinks may be existing in Jupiter.
And he has a right to think so; for, on our own earth, have we not had
animals whose bones were on the outside, and whose inward parts were
all of cartilage? They would have been pretty playthings for Jupiter’s
emphatically soft nymphs and unvertebrated swains!

If the nuns of the Anglo-Saxon times were given to gorgeousness, the
clergy were not at all uninclined to dandyism. Boniface himself denounced
those priests who wore broad studs and images of worms, as servants of
Antichrist. Garments so adorned are looked upon by the descendants of
this great Anglo-Saxon missionary as the undoubtedly original “M. B.
coats.”

The Danes introduced fashions that sadly perplexed the simple tailors of
all Anglia. The former, in the days of their paganism, were attired in
garments as black as the raven which soared on their national standard.
When they came to England they learned to surpass the Anglo-Saxons
themselves in the gaiety of their apparel and manners. They even took to
combing their hair once a day; became so effeminate as to wash weekly;
and changed their body-linen, if not as often as they might, still
more frequently than was their wont of old. “By these means,” says old
Wallingford, “they pleased the eyes of the women, and frequently seduced
the wives and daughters of the nobility.” Alas, that virtue should not be
proof against even a half-washed seducer!

One of the greatest of the North Sea chieftains derived his name from his
dress, and Ragner Lodbroch means Ralph Leatherbreeches. The Lethbridges
of Somersetshire are _said_ to be descendants from this worthy. They
might go further in search of an ancestor and fare worse. Lodbroch
delighted in blood and plunder; wine he drank by the quart; wealth he
acquired by “right of might;” he believed in little, and feared even
less. A family anxious to assert its nobility could hardly do better than
hold fast by such a hero. Many a genealogical tree springs from a less
illustrious root.

The submission with which England received laws of fashion from France
is seen in the circumstance that even before the Conquest the English
imported the “mode” from beyond Channel, and universally adopted it.
This was the case both in speech and dress. The Saxon tongue became as
mute at the court of Edward the Confessor as the Flemish language has
around the throne of Leopold of Belgium. The respectable sires however
of the period did not make themselves so “outlandish” in their garb as
did their sons; yet when William tumbled on the sands at Pevensey, half
the hostile array prepared to resist his coming, as well as those who
looked on and awaited the course of events, were familiar with his form
of speech and accustomed to his fashion of dress. The fact that when
William was agitated he invariably occupied himself in lacing and untying
his cloak, is at least as well worth knowing as that the great Coligny
under similar circumstances used to insert two or three toothpicks into
his mouth, and there champ them into pulp. Let us add, that the Normans
shaved close and washed thoroughly; and the dirty Saxons might have found
consolation in the circumstance that their throats were cut by cleanly
gentlemen.

They were a costly people however, those Normans; and they not only
ruined the Saxons, but themselves, by the extravagance of their dress,
and the ever-varying fashions to which they bore an alacrity of
allegiance. Some of our wealthiest men of Norman descent, or fancying
themselves to be so, adopt in these days a fashion common enough in the
period of the Norman Kings, wearing a plumed helm on parade for show, and
a “wide-awake” elsewhere for comfort. The Normans even took the venerated
smock-frock of the Saxons, and modifying it a little, and lining it with
fur for the winter, they wore it as a surcoat over their armour, and
called it by the name of _bliaus_. Any gentleman therefore who wears a
blouse and a wide-awake may fancy himself, if he please, as being attired
like a Norman knight. Well, in spite of the strength of his fancy and
the sameness of the articles in question, he will be as little like to
Norman cavalier “as I to Hercules.”

I have said that the Normans generally were remarkable for the splendour
and variety of their costume; I may add that some of the Saxons were in
no degree behind them. There is Becket, for instance, the champion of
the Saxons and advocate of the Commons. When that remarkably humble man
went on his famous progress to Paris, the rustics observed, as he rode
meekly along, that the king of England must be a marvellous personage
indeed, seeing that his Lord Chancellor looked more like a king on his
throne than a traveller in the saddle. He was as stately in dress at
home as abroad; and he never forgave King Henry for tearing from his
shoulders his splendid new scarlet mantle lined with fur, to fling it to
a shivering beggar at his side. Excellent practical lesson, it may be
observed. Well, it assuredly was all the practical charity ever evinced
by the king. And moreover it was inappropriate. We all laughed when the
angelic Irving subscribed his gold watch to some benevolent fund; and we
should feel no particular increase of respect for our Sovereign and the
Lord Primate if they were to stand at Temple Bar, and the former were
to distribute the wardrobe of the latter among the mendicants who pass
beneath that hideously ridiculous arch.

Foppery in dress was at its height in the reign of Henry III., when men
half-ruined themselves in order that they might dress in vestments of
the magnificent material called cloth of Baldekins, or of Baldeck, the
usually received term for Babylon. The rich Cyclas of this time were
also named from the locality where the material was manufactured,—a
custom common enough, as may be seen in the names Worsted, Blanket,
Cambric, Diaper (d’Yprès), Bayonet, and many others. The general love of
dress, and the wealth manifested by the grandeur of the latter, made
Innocent IV. to speak of England as a “garden of delights,” and a “truly
inexhaustible fountain of riches.” From this fountain his Holiness drank
many a draught; and they who were compelled to supply it wished it might
choke him. But Innocent made cheap compensation to England by conferring
on it the signal honour of adopting its old national “wide-awake,”
and after dyeing it red, conferring it on his Cardinals. The scarlet
wide-awake was first worn at the Council of Lyons, in 1245. The Cardinals
did not exhibit their accustomed vigilance when they permitted the
fashion of this covering to glide from that of the wide-awake into that
of the “broad-brim” of the Society of Friends. But perhaps it is because
of its present fashion that Mr. Bright, who loves Russia and hates the
press, has such respect for Rome and such welcome for her aggressions.

“Why do you not wear richer apparel?” once asked a familiar friend of
Edward I. “Because,” said the sensible king, “I cannot be more estimable
in fine than I am in simple clothing.” If the monarch had only shown as
much sense in other matters, he would have been a more profitable king
to the state, however little beneficial he may have been to tailors. It
was, of course, the fashion now to be rather simply dressed; but there
were occasional departures from the rule: such as when the young Prince
Edward was invested as a knight, on which occasion the Temple Gardens
were crowded with the young nobility, his “companions,” who assembled
there to receive a magnificent distribution of purple robes, fine linen
garments, and mantles woven with gold. The two latter were furnished by
the merchant-tailors; and these, no doubt, blessed the donor as heartily
as the trade would now do, were her Majesty to assemble the heirs and
younger sons of Peers, have them measured in public, and dressed at her
expense for the benefit of trade. There are many younger sons who would
be as rejoiced thereat as the tailors themselves.

Old Kit Marlowe, and doubtless from good authority, has graphically
described not only Edward the Second, but that fine gentleman, his
favourite Gaveston. Of the latter he says:—

    “I have not seen a dapper Jack so brisk;
    He wears a short Italian hooded cloak
    Larded with pearl, and in his Tuscan cap
    A jewel of more value than the crown.”

And of Edward, Mortimer is made to say:—

    “When wert thou in the field with banner spread?
    But once; and then thy soldiers march’d like players,
    With garish robes, not armour; and thyself,
    Bedaub’d with gold, rode laughing at the rest,
    Nodding and shaking of thy spangled crest,
    Where women’s favours hung like labels down.”

If the Norman Kings up to the period of Edward I. had encouraged a costly
extravagance of dress, there was another Norman habit which had spread
among the people generally, and quite as much to their cost,—the wretched
habit of swearing. To that people might well be applied the assertion,
that they were covered with curses as with a garment. The Saxons were
astounded at the variety and intensity of these oaths. They had not been
accustomed to such profanity; but as the conquerors, and particularly
the kings, swore whenever they spoke, why to use oaths was to put on the
air of a conqueror and gentleman, and so a species of Norman pride kept
oaths in vigour among the _élite_ of society until a very recent period;
but, as Mr. Robert Acres remarks, “the best terms will grow obsolete, and
Damns have had their day.” How we progressed through execratory terms
until this consummation was arrived at, is very tersely told in an old
epigram of Sir John Harrington’s:—

    “In elder times an ancient custom was
    To swear, in weighty matters, by the mass;
    But when the mass went down, as old men note,
    They swore then by the cross of this same groat.
    And when the cross was likewise held in scorn,
    Then by their faith the common oath was sworn;
    Last, having sworn away all faith and troth,
    Only ‘G—d damn them’ is their common oath.
    Thus custom kept decorum by gradation,
    That losing mass, cross, faith, they find damnation.”

Henry I. was surrounded by a crowd of friends, whose dresses were
splendid and whose principles were detestable,—not to say “devilish.”
These were the “Effeminati.” They were like the “mignons” of the French
King Henri, and acquired their appellation from the fact of dressing
nearly after the fashion of women. Their tunics were deep-sleeved, and
their mantles long-trained. The peaks of their shoes were not only
enormously long, but twisted so as to represent the horns of a ram or the
coils of a serpent. Their peaks, introduced by Fulk, Earl of Anjou, to
conceal his misshapen feet, were stuffed with tow; and certainly, were
any earl or other gentleman now to enter a drawing-room thus remarkably
shod, he would himself be taken in tow (if I may be so bold as to say
so), and conveyed before a tribunal _de lunatico inquirendo_. The
Effeminati, like the French “mignons,” wore their hair long, smooth, and
parted in the middle; and they were not only unpleasantly unnatural to
look at, but were horribly so in their deeds.

The foreign knights and visitors who came to Windsor in Edward the
First’s reign, and brought with them a continual succession of varying
fashions, turned the heads of the young with delight, and of the old with
disgust. Douglas, the monk of Glastonbury, is especially denunciative
and satirical on this point. He says that in the horrible variety of
costume,—“now long, now large, now wide, now straight,”—the style of
dress was “destitute and devert from all honesty of old arraye or good
usage.” It is all, he says, “so nagged and knibbed on every side, and all
so shattered and also buttoned, that I with truth shall say, they seem
more like to tormentors or devils in their clothing, and also in their
shoying and other array, than they seemed to be like men.” And the old
monk had good foundation for his complaint; and the Commons themselves
having, what the Commons now have not, a dread of becoming as extravagant
as their betters in the article of dress, actually sought the aid of
Parliament. That august assembly met the complaint by restricting the
use of furs and furls to the royal family and nobles worth one thousand
_per annum_. Knights and ladies worth four hundred marks yearly, were
permitted to deck themselves in cloths of gold and silver, and to wear
certain jewellery. Poor knights, squires, and damsels were prohibited
from appearing in the costume of those of higher degree. As for the
Commons themselves, they could put on nothing better than unadorned
woollen cloth; and if an apprentice or a milliner had been bold enough
to wear a ring on the finger, it was in peril of a decree that it should
be taken off,—not the finger, but the ring,—with confiscation of the
forbidden finery.

The consequence was that the Commons, being under prohibition to put on
finery, became smitten with a strong desire to assume it; and much did
they rejoice when they were ruled over by so consummate a fop as Richard
of Bordeaux. All classes were content to do what many classes joyfully do
in our own days,—dress beyond their means; and we find in old Harding’s
‘Chronicle’ that not only were

    “Yemen and gromes in cloth of silk arrayed,
    Sattin and damask, in doublettes and in gownnes,”

but that all this, as well as habits of “cloth of greene and
scarleteen,—cut work and brodwar, was all,” as the Chronicler expresses
it, “for unpayed;” that is, was _not paid for_. So that very many among
us do not so much despise the wisdom afforded us by the example of our
ancestors as didactic poets and commonplace honest writers falsely
allege them to do. And those ancestors of Richard the Second’s time were
especially given to glorify themselves in parti-coloured garments of
white and red, such being the colours of the King’s livery (as blue and
white were those of John of Gaunt); and they who wore these garments,
sometimes of half-a-dozen colours in each, why they looked, says an old
writer, “as though the fire of St. Anthony, or some such mischance,” had
cankered and eaten into half their bodies. The long-toed shoes, held up
to the knee by a chain and hook, were called _crackowes_, the fashion
thereof coming from Cracow in Poland. The not less significant name of
“devil’s receptacles” were given to the wide sleeves of this reign, for
the reason, as the Monk of Evesham tells us, that whatever was stolen was
thrust into them.

The fashion of clothes has long ceased to mark the position of the
wearer. On this subject, Fuller says in his ‘Church History,’ when
treating of the time of Edward III., that “some had a project that
men’s clothes might be their signs to show their birth, degree, or
estate, so that the quality of an unknown person might, at the first
sight, be expounded by his apparel. But this was at once let fall as
impossible: statesmen in all ages, notwithstanding their several laws to
the contrary, being fain to connive at men’s riot in this kind, which
maintaineth more poor people than their charity.”

Distinction in dress, it will be remembered, was not allowed by More in
his Utopia. “All the island over,” he says, “they make their own clothes,
without any other distinction than that which is necessary for marking
the difference between the two sexes, and the married and unmarried.
The fashion never alters; and as it is not ungrateful nor uneasy, so it
is fitted for their climate, and calculated both for their summers and
winters. Every family makes their own clothes; but all among them, women
as well as men, learn one or other of the trades formerly mentioned.” A
costume suitable for all conditions of the seasons, were a consummation
that will long be among the things to be devoutly wished for, and never
attained.

It was once the fashion to wear coats, the material for which had not
long before been on the back of the sheep. For rapidity of work in this
way, I know nothing that can compete with the achievement of Coxeter of
Greenham Mills, near Newbury. He had a couple of South Down sheep shorn
at his factory, at five o’clock in the morning; the wool thus produced
was put through the usual processes; and by a quarter past six in the
evening, it resulted in a complete damson-coloured coat, which was worn
at an evening party, by Sir John Throckmorton. A wager for a thousand
guineas was won by this feat, with three-quarters of an hour to spare.
The sheep were roasted whole, and devoured at a splendid banquet. In one
day they afforded comfort to both the inner and outward man.

We have often been told, that “Beauty, when unadorned, is adorned the
most;” and there is much truth in that wholesome apothegm. Beauty
indeed needs to be dressed; but Prudence should be her handmaiden. In
illustration of the excellence of this counsel, I may quote what happened
to two young ladies and one lover in the days of chivalry.

In those days there lived an old noble, rich in two daughters, and in
nought besides. Of these, he promised one to a young knight, who was
wealthy and idle, and who—strange characteristic of young and gallant
knight!—was well content to be saved the trouble of wooing.

On a certain fine morning the sire made the same announcement to his
girls which the father of Dinah made to that now celebrated and unhappy
young lady,—namely, the necessity of decking themselves in their most
seductive array, as there was a lover on the road who would dine with
them that day. Now, if the morning was fine, there was also an eager and
a nipping air abroad; but the elder of the two damsels, disregarding the
temperature, and thinking only how best to display her slender waist
and graceful shape, put on a “cote hardie;” and in this close-fitting
garment, without an inch of fur to lend it warmth, she accompanied her
sister to the portal, to bid welcome to the lover, looking for a lady of
his love. But that sister was attired with reference to the condition of
the thermometer, if her father had one, which is exceedingly doubtful.
She was warmly clad; and if her figure was concealed by her mantle, the
result of such covering was, that her young blood, in circulating, left a
rose upon her cheeks, and did not fix itself, in obstinate stagnation, as
in her more airy sister’s case, on the tip of the nose.

Now a red nose is not fascinating; and the knight’s choice was soon
made. He gave his hand to the maiden who had shown most sense in the
choice of attire, and a very merry wedding was the speedy consequence.
As for what turned up in the way of further results, it was, I believe,
chiefly the nose of the unsuccessful candidate, which became “retroussé
en permanence”. The moral of the tale is respectfully recommended to the
notice of all young ladies who seek to catch ardent knights on wintry
mornings.

If the men in the days of Edward III. wore “tails behind,” as well as
beards before, the ladies were not behind them in extravagance—in tails;
and indeed in other matters. For a lady to ride on a palfrey, and not on
a charger, would have been considered as derogatory as for a bridesmaid,
in our days, to “spoil her prospects” by going to a wedding in a
one-horse fly. The damsels of this age very much affected the dress of
the men, and we have seen the same affectation in our own time; and this
fashion was pushed to such an extreme, that they even carried two tiny
daggers in the pouches of their embroidered zones. Their head-dress still
lingers among the female peasantry of Normandy, and may be recognized in
the species of mitre cap, of enormous height, from the summit of which
streamers float in the air like pennants from the masts of some “tall
amiral.” It may be added, that if, in many respects, the dresses of the
women resembled those of the men, their deeds, too, were like theirs; and
these were often (like the dresses) none of the cleanest.

We will discuss the progress of these matters in a new chapter.




ADONIS AT HOME AND ABROAD.

